<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>CHAPTER 1</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<div style="z-index:1;position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="chapter_1.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_1.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<h1>CHAPTER 1</h1>
	<p style="font-size:1.6rem;font-weight: bold;margin:2rem 0 0.5rem 0">'The Unconscious Is Politics':</p>
	<p style="font-size:1.6rem;font-weight: bold;margin:0 0 3rem 0">From Saussure to Marx</p>
	<h2 id="part_1"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">S</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">TRUCTURE AND HISTORY</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="1" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#1">中</a>1963 marks a considerable shift in Lacan's teaching. It is the year of the infamous 'excommunication' from the International Psychoanalytic Association. In response Lacan created the Ecole freudienne de Paris, which was meant to make an important institutional and doctrinal break with the official guardians of the Freudian legacy. The school was founded with the objective of constituting an organism:<span class="quote"><a id="2" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#2">中</a>where a labour is to be accomplished - a labour, which, in the field opened up by Freud, renews its sharp razor of truth, - a labour, which accompanies the original praxis he introduced under the name of psychoanalysis in the task that it has in our world, - a labour, which, through a persistent critique, denounces the deviations and compromises that impede its progress by degrading its use.</span><a id="3" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#3">中</a>Such a foundational act does not conceal its political dimension, which consists notably in the attempt to render the subversive political, philosophical and epistemological dimension of psychoanalysis. The deviations and compromises that traverse the history of psychoanalysis concern particularly the successful combination of its practice with the free market economy, a combination that Lacan already denounced on several other occasions. According to the famous anecdote, Freud supposedly said to Jung during their visit to the United States (1909) that Americans are not aware him and Jung were bringing them the plague. In turn, Freud in his enthusiasm remained ignorant for the fact that American capitalism already possessed an antidote against this continental disease. This antidote was nothing other than the ideology of economic liberalism. Freedom, equality, property and private interest, this efficient ideological junction of political universalities with private egoism, or ‘human narcissism’, as Freud would likely have put it, successfully neutralised the radicality of psychoanalytic insights into the nature of thinking, subjectivity and society. The price for the psychoanalytic success story in the land of opportunities was high and led to the oblivion of the critical truth that Freud revealed in his discovery of the unconscious, the interdependency of subjectivation and alienation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="4" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#4">中</a>According to Lacan's founding act, the main task of the school was to open up the space where labour could finally become a process, in which critique and truth would intertwine. The labour in question is not merely theoretical but even more so the labour that Freud attributed to the unconscious. This form of labour comprises an inquiry into the processes that have determined the subject’s mode of existence and accompany it to the point of transformation. What matters for Lacan is ‘not a long list but determined workers’. He offers his return to Freud as an example of such labour, which may sound pretentious but in fact contains a rejection of any attempt that would want to ground the psychoanalytic institution on transference. The latter may hold the psychoanalytic community together but for the price of transforming it into a Church - hence Lacan's reference to the excommunication of Spinoza.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="5" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#5">中</a>There is one crucial reason why transference must be removed from the foundations of the school (and, homologically, from the party). By grounding the institution on the production of positive knowledge rather than on critical truth (the ‘sharp razor’), it displaces the accent from the subject of the unconscious to the subject of cognition. As we know, Lacan's institutional experiment later failed, and various subsequent formations all restored the more orthodox type of institutional politics. In 1980, the school would be ultimately dissolved as it had regressed back to the transference relation, even if Lacan had consistently rejected identification with the position of the master:<span class="quote"><a id="6" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#6">中</a>Fortunately, I never said I was the Freudian School. . . I do not take myself for the subject of knowledge. The proof lies in the fact . . that I invented the subject supposed to know, so that psychoanalysts would stop believing, I mean identifying with it.</span><a id="7" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#7">中</a>The school not only strived to abolish the difference between Lacan and the analytic community, but even more so between the analysts and the analysands. When analysts are no longer identified with knowledge, they are deprived of their meta-position, which is always-already a position of domination. In this respect, the subject supposed to know is a critical invention, which offers deeper insight into the phenomenon of transference within and without the psychoanalytic context. Transference inevitably contains a moment of fetishisation, through which knowledge is projected onto the other and turned into an intrinsic and positive quality. In distinctive contrast to this scenario, Lacan maintained that, in relation to his audience and to the analytic community, he assumed the position of the analysand, where the opposite figure of knowledge and of the subject is at work: the unconscious and the subject of the signifier. Of course transference cannot be eliminated from this relation, which is why Lacan emphasised the importance of formalisation in the transmission of knowledge and truth. Only logics can successfully mediate in the opposition of two concurrent forms of transmission, the one grounded on <span class="term">philia</span>, transference love, which would be the 'philosophical' transmission, still presupposing the figure of the master; and the other grounded on the autonomy of discourse(e. g. , the formal language of mathematics), which would ideally constitute a community that does not gravitate around a master-figure. The separation of transmission from the speakers position of enunciation prevents the analyst from identifying with the subject of knowledge and believing to possess some substantial knowledge of the unconscious. Transmission through formalisation abolishes the idea of a dogmatic corpus that all the members of the school should uncritically adopt. It designates a labour process, in which Lacan is one among many subjects of labour, a case of the determined worker, whose aim is not to produce knowledge but to support the 'transfer of labour'. Transmission enables determined workers to overcome the frames of their singular case and pass over to universality (community). A case becomes the point from which a universal can be <span class="term">constructed</span>. Such a constructible universal is no pregiven abstraction that subsumes particular cases but a singular universal. It demands labour -hence the 'transfer of labour’, the intimate connection between labour, formalisation and transmission. We can observe more generally here the importance of what Freud already called <span class="term">Durcharbeiten</span>, working through, in the analytic context.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="8" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#8">中</a>After the excommunication we can also speak of Lacan's second return to Freud. This return is marked by the change of theoretical alliances and, consequently, by a significant reinterpretation of previous teaching. The first return famously read Freud with structural linguistics and culminated in the claim that Freud’s theories anticipated the Saussurean and Jakobsonian theory of language. Metonymy and metaphor, the two central operations in language, are discovered in the way the unconscious processes manipulate the conscious and the preconscious material. The two linguistic operations translate into condensation and displacement, the main achievements of unconscious labour. The linguistic return to Freud became a synonym for Lacan’s structural psychoanalysis, and the most condensed formula of this early development, ‘The unconscious is structured like a language’, has since turned into a common doxa.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="9" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#9">中</a>After the excommunication, Lacan progressively elaborated an alternative reading of the Freudian discovery that found its new privileged alliance in Marx's critique of political economy. The move away from the linguistic paradigm was accomplished immediately after May'68, though these political events were not the only circumstance that contributed to the reorientation of the return to Freud. The move towards the critical paradigm was not unrelated to the limits of structuralism, notably in respect to the theorisation of unconscious production and the growing weight given to the problem of <span class="term">jouissance</span> in Lacan's teaching.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="10" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#10">中</a>Nevertheless, Lacan's second return to Freud did not simply deny the importance of the structuralist isolation of the signifier:<span class="quote"><a id="11" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#11">中</a>With Saussure and the Prague linguistic circle linguistics is constituted on a cut, which is the bar placed between the signifier and the signified in order to expose the difference, on which the signifier is constituted in an absolute way, and through which it effectively obtains its autonomy.</span><a id="12" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#12">中</a>Linguistic structuralism begins with the recognition of the autonomy of the signifier and with the minimalism of structure. Saussure starts from the bar between the signifier and the signified that enables him to isolate both constitutive components of the linguistic sign and expose the arbitrary nature of their relation. We can recall that the bar in question does not aim at the externalrelation between words and things but at the internal consistency of linguistic signs. It thus designates the absence of any substantial, essential or immanent link between the two components, which implies that the relation between the signifier (the series of sounds)and the signified(the associated mental representation)is actually a non-relation: an instable, shifting and groundless link. Saussure thereby exposes the structuring function of the bar and conceives the autonomy of the signifier, independent from its association to the signified and even more so from its relation to the referent, the element of external reality. The underlying thesis of this structural minimalism can also be formulated as follows: <span class="term">the structure is a cut</span>. This reformulation takes into account one of the most famous Saussurean metaphors, where the process of structuration is interpreted as an intervention, which orders the undifferentiated and chaotic flux of sounds and mental images. What is crucial here is that the cut can be considered both a case of difference and something that lies in the very foundation of differentiation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="13" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#13">中</a>The Saussurean signifier is thus constituted in an absolute and autonomous way <span class="term">as</span> a difference to another signifier, and hence as difference in itself. The signifying chain, this most general and formal representation of linguistic structure, contains a repetition of the cut, thereby forming a chain of pure differences or negativities. The revolutionary character of structural linguistics lies in the fact that it no longer theorises language on the assumption of stable and univocal referentiality, be it external or internal, but rather through the cut, pointing towards a non-relation and instability between the two components of the sign. If an encounter between words and things, on the one hand, and between sounds and meanings, on the other, nevertheless takes place, it is inevitably contingent, in the sense that such an encounter always contains a failure and displacement, a distortion of referentiality. To repeat, the implicit thesis of structural linguistics is that <span class="term">language is a non-relation rather than relation</span>, and Lacan’s accent on the autonomy of the signifier pushes this premise in the foreground.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="14" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#14">中</a>The bar between the signifier and the signified initiated an epistemological revolution in human sciences, because the structuralist paradigm disrupted the historical predominance of ‘Aristotelianism’ in linguistics and in philosophy of language. Before the emergence of structuralism, language was almost exclusively conceived in reference to Aristotle's notion of <span class="term">organon</span>, which enabled the definition of language as a tool and an organ of communication and of social relation, an abstract convention between autonomous, rational and conscious subjects. Through the lenses of structural linguistics, language turns out to be a far more paradoxical and complex object, a system of differences that resists totalisation, and because it is untotalisable, it is both autonomous and inexistent - hence the Lacanian use of the very same bar that in Saussure separates the signifier from the signified, in order to designate the inexistence of the Other and the split of the subject.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="15" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#15">中</a>The psychoanalytic discovery of the unconscious stands in immediate continuity with the autonomy of the signifier. One can speak of the unconscious only under the condition that language constitutes an autonomous register serving more than mere communication and having material consequences that cannot be reduced to cognitive and neurobiological processes. The necessary predisposition for the discovery of the unconscious is thus the rejection of the linguistic Aristotelianism that nowadays lives on in the analytic philosophy of language, Chomsky’s linguistics and normative theories of communication such as Habermas's.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="16" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#16">中</a>In psychoanalysis, the autonomy of the signifier obtains a different expression. From the manifestations of the unconscious, which is precisely a concretisation of linguistic autonomy, one cannot eliminate the presence of the body, the site of discursive production that contains two aspects: the production of subjectivity and the production of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. This association of language with production renews the old philosophical problematic of causality, which led Lacan to rank the signifier among material causes-an anti-Aristotelian move within an Aristotelian vocabulary. One crucial aspect of this structural causality was thematised already in the first return to Freud, which defined the subject of the unconscious as an inevitable effect of the signifier. But only the development of the theory of discourses in the late 1960s provided the framework for the whole nexus of problems that had preoccupied psychoanalysis since its beginnings, the issues of the autonomy of the signifier, the subject of the unconscious and <span class="term">jouissance</span>. By recognising the causality of the signifier, Lacan decisively counteracted the pragmatic tradition, which saw in language an unproblematic <span class="term">immaterial and ineffective existence</span>. For psychoanalysis, on the contrary, language is a <span class="term">material and effective inexistence</span>.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="17" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#17">中</a>Here the main feature of psychoanalytic materialism can be detected. Language has real consequences only as a disclosed system of negativities (signifiers as pure differences) concretised in speech through which these negativities are inscribed in the living body. Lacan's second return to Freud will designate this disclosed structure of language with the notion of <span class="term">non-all</span>, thereby proposing yet another translation of the Saussurean bar. And, as already mentioned, in the context of structural psychoanalysis the same bar designates the alienation of the subject and the inexistence of the Other. The barred subject that the signifier represents to another signifer and the barred Other, the open system of differences, both explicate the significance of the autonomy of the signifier. But this is also the point where the limit of classical structuralism begins to show.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="18" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#18">中</a>Lacan's second return to Freud is not unrelated to the shift that Jakobson introduced in relation to Saussure by extending the autonomy of the signifier to poetic language. In this way, Jakobson showed that the poetisation of the signifier (linguistic equivocity) should be thought in parallel with its formalisation and as an expression of its autonomy. Unlike Heidegger, for whom poetic language unveils the original ‘sense of being’, Jakobson accentuates in poetry the productive dimension of language, which needs to be situated beyond the relation between the signifier and the signified, in the relations between the signifiers. In this sense, Jakobson's poetics echoes Freud’s discovery of the libidinal investment of the signifier. Inspired by Jakobson's developments, Lacan defines the signifier as an apparatus of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, although Jakobson's linguistics does not entirely support this definition, as it restricts discursive production to the equivocity of meaning.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="19" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#19">中</a>In his second return to Freud, Lacan did not produce any axiom that could match ‘The unconscious is structured as a language’, but its most fundamental point is nevertheless well encapsulated in an apparently enigmatic statement: ‘The unconscious is politics’. The formulation leaves no doubt that it should be read in pair with the first one. How to understand the shift from the structure of language to politics? Does Lacan simply oppose abstract structure and concrete experience? Not really. The second axiom strives to overcome the opposition of structure and politics, to which their opponents had pushed the representatives of structuralism. This abolition is most unambiguously expressed in Lacan's notorious intervention after Foucault's lecture, ‘What Is an Author?’ (1969). In his response, Lacan firmly rejects the claims that May ’68 negated structuralism, or at least his own notion of structure, which, at this point, significantly differed from the Saussurean system of differences:<span class="quote"><a id="20" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#20">中</a>Structuralist or not, I would like to remark that the field, which is unclearly marked by this move, does not seem to express the negation of the subject. What is addressed is the subject’s dependency, which is something completely different; and notably, at the level of the return to Freud, the subject’s dependency in relation to something truly elementary, what we tried to isolate with the expression ‘the signifier’ ... I do not think that it is in any way legitimate to write that structures do not descend into the street, for if the May events demonstrate anything, then [they demonstrate] precisely the descent of structures in the street. The fact that this was written at the very site where this descent took place, simply shows us something that is very often, and even most often immanent to what we call the act, namely that it misrecognises itself.</span><a id="21" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#21">中</a>The idea of structures in the street shows that this key structuralist notion neither stands for an unproblematic and invariable system of differences nor designates the transcendentalism of the symbolic order. The descent of structure to the street is marked by an immanent break, contradiction and instability, which place the autonomy of the signifier in a different light. Lacan thus suggests that the possibility of a social change should be thought on this level because only rigorous structural analysis can explain why the revolutionary potential of the social movement, grounded on the alliance of students and workers, ended with a failure and instead contributed to the establishment of a ‘new spirit of capitalism’. The core of Lacan's polemic against the post-’68 critiques of structuralism concerns the notion of the subject. Various forms of subjectivity can certainly be thought, but there is one form that the social structures build on, and that is the subject that is caused by the autonomy of the discursive relations. It is on this basis that the given order determines the thinking and action, and it is also here that the subject comes to think and act against the established regime. The subject’s dependency can be exposed in the way the agents of May ’68 conceived their act, namely through a misunderstanding that is best seen in the graffiti: ‘Structures do not march on the streets’. The agents and the supporters of May '68 opposed structure and the event, or structure and politics, and herein lay one of their key failures. Instead of thinking the events as an outburst of the structural real, they were guided by the fantasy of a pure real outside structure, thereby overlooking the fact that the demanded liberalisation, for instance of education, initiated a more direct commodification of knowledge.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="22" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#22">中</a>For Lacan, the political events demonstrated the action of structure within the concrete actions of students; on the one hand, the antagonism between the determination of the subject through structural relations; on the other, the subject’s resistance to the impositions of the system. In this respect, May '68 was indeed an act. This was the case not only because a political subject manifested itself, but also because it contained a minimal shift between the place where the acting subjects - the revolutionary students - saw themselves and the place of their actions in the general transformation of the capitalist system. The descent of structure to the street thus formulates an unambiguous thesis on the link between politics, structure and the unconscious: structural paradoxes highlighted by the logic of the signifier are directly linked to the antagonisms that traverse the established social order. And if the unconscious can be associated with politics, i.e., if political acts contain the subject of the signifier as their internal negativity, then the Freudian concept does not signify a detached and private experience but, on the contrary, provides insight into the same structural dynamic that eventually led to the destabilisation of social links. In short, political events are realisations of structural contradictions and logical formations.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="23" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#23">中</a>‘The unconscious is politics’ contains a change in the notion of structure and suggests a specific understanding of the link between psychoanalysis and politics. It insists that the discovery of the unconscious entails a transformation of politics, although not in the sense that it reduces politics to unconscious complexes. Lacan leaves no doubt that ‘the unconscious is politics’ does not mean ‘politics is unconscious’. The latter would indeed imply a psychologisation of politics, its reduction to the content of unconscious complexes. The ‘is’ between unconscious and politics is not reflexive. It rather concerns the formal inclusion of the subject of the unconscious in the field of politics, which, notably after Marx's critique, thinks the constitution of social links through alienation and negativity. It is therefore not surprising that Lacan's second return to Freud was guided by the effort to elaborate a theory of discourses that demonstrated the logical dependence of unconscious mechanisms on the predominant social link. Consequently, the second return to Freud did not simply equate the unconscious with the structure of language but with the structural real, the intertwining of representation and production, the two faces of the causality of the signifier. Thereby Lacan problematises the transcendentalism of the symbolic order that had marked his earlier teaching as well as the entirety of classical structuralism.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="24" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#24">中</a>The new materialist orientation, which emphasises the real status of the unconscious, implies two seemingly opposite claims, that the structure of language is the condition of the unconscious and that the unconscious is not entirely reducible to the symbolic structure. Instead, it testifies to an ontological scandal that concerns the autonomy of the signifier as such, an autonomy that turns most real in the breakdown of structural consistency (e.g, traumatism in Freud). The more language withdraws from its relational aspect, the more its real effects become manifest. With this move, Lacan avoids the direct ontologisation and substantialisation of the unconscious, as well as its simple reduction to a single discursive structure, in the given case the capitalist discourse.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="25" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#25">中</a>The limits of linguistic structuralism are addressed in yet another reformulation of Lacan's classical axiom:<span class="quote"><a id="26" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#26">中</a>People make a false opposition between structure, which would be synchronic and therefore outside of history, and dialectic, which would be diachronic, sunken in time. But this is inaccurate. Take, in my book, the text entitled <span class="term">The Rome Discourse</span> and you will be able to estimate the importance I ascribe to history, to the point that it appears to me coextensive with the register of the unconscious. The unconscious is history. The experienced [<span class="term">le vécu</span>] is marked by a first historicity. All this is written, black on white, in my book.</span><a id="27" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#27">中</a>‘Unconscious is history’ rejects two false oppositions: between structure and dialectics, and between unconscious and history. These oppositions are merely variations of a more fundamental opposition, which marked postwar continental philosophy, between structure and genesis. As mentioned earlier, this opposition needs to be substituted with a specific intertwining of structure and historicity, one that does not hide its dialectical pretensions. We can understand why this opposition makes little sense for psychoanalysis. The unconscious is situated in the intersection of synchronicity and diachronicity, which means that it constantly demonstrates transformations and instabilities, on the one hand, and temporary fixations, on the other, In this way the dichotomy of structure and history becomes entirely inoperative and meaningless. For Freud, every mental structure contains movement, in which a psychic conflict can be isolated. Consequently, his idea of structure comes down to this immanent dynamic and not to some ahistorical constellation of rigid relations. The minimum of structural stability can be located in the processes of condensation and displacement, which find their linguistic equivalent in metaphor and metonymy. But to repeat again, these two operations are unthinkable without their diachronic dimension, which introduces temporality in the picture. Diachrony is the necessary condition, which allows Freud to theorise condensation and displacement as specific achievements of unconscious labour.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="28" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#28">中</a>Freud provided probably the most passionate, although not unproblematic, vision of the intertwining of structure and history when he compared the unconscious with Rome. In <span class="term">Civilisation and Its Discontents</span> we read that, unlike the actual Rome, whose history is present in the form of ruins and fragments that are impossible to reconstruct, the unconscious Eternal City is comparable to a hologram, in which everything remains intact: all buildings are preserved in all their historic stages, and all of the city's past is constantly present. The unconscious seems to know no time, as far as the essential part of temporality is corruption, change and forgetting, while from another perspective it is nothing but time: history pressing on the present and manifesting in disruptions of discourse, in lapses, dreams and jokes, in interruptions of the 'eternal present’, in which Marx and Engels recognised the most elementary operation of ideology. The main ideological achievement thus lies in the rejection of temporality, in declaring the end of history, in the false eternalisation of the dominating discourse.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="29" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#29">中</a>Freud was naturally aware of the limits of his metaphor, which more betrays his personal fascination with Rome than correctly determines the relation between structure and the temporality of the unconscious. There is another, more suitable discussion of their relation in an early writing on screen memories. There, Freud claims that human memory is not simply an archive of unchangeable data but a collection that is subjected to constant modifications. Far from being neutral, these changes express an irreducible conflict between heterogeneous psychic instances and their particular tendencies. What matters here is the conclusion that Freud draws from the way screen memories interpret other, presumably historically more accurate memories:<span class="quote"><a id="30" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#30">中</a>The falsified memory is the first that we become aware of: the raw material of memory-traces out of which it was forged remains unknown to us in its original form. The recognition of this fact must diminish the distinction we have drawn between screen memories and other memories derived from our childhood. It may indeed be questioned whether we have any memories at all <span class="term">from</span> our childhood: memories <span class="term">relating to</span> our childhood may be all that we possess. Our childhood memories show us our earliest years not as they were but as they appeared at the later periods when the memories were aroused. In these periods of arousal, the childhood memories did not, as people are accustomed to say, <span class="term">emerge</span>; they were <span class="term">formed</span> at that time. And a number of motives, with no concern for historical accuracy, had a part in forming them, as well as in the selection of the memories themselves.</span><a id="31" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#31">中</a>The immediate lesson of this passage leaves no doubt: history does not exist, or, put differently, history is not an objective history of events, just as memory is no archive of neutral facts. Instead, Freud proposes to see it as a series of deformations, displacements, rewritings and, most importantly, conflicts, which nevertheless contain a minimum of structural relations that support the entire movement or simply are a structure in movement. History is structured as a language, and just like language it does not exist but nevertheless has material consequences for the subject.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="32" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#32">中</a>What Freud encountered in this representation of history is the retroactive causality, which will mark his subsequent conception of the historicity of the unconscious. Retroaction does more than merely modify the meaning of historical events from the viewpoint of the present. In a certain sense, this very retroactive modification constitutes the history and memories of the past. Retroactivity is envisaged as a form of causality and not as a distortion of objective facts. The formation of memories of early childhood, of the years in which a series of events that determined the subject’s subsequent development took place, plays the main role in the retroactive constitution and transformation of the subject's history.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="33" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#33">中</a>We can recall here the most famous example of this retroaction, the traumatic event that triggered illness in the case of the Wolf Man. The event did not simply take place 'objectively' somewhere in the patient's early childhood and repeat itself later in life. It was a real effect of retroactive structural causality, which associated a contingent occurrence or observation from the past with an anxiety dream, in which the patient saw wolves sitting on the tree in front of the family house and immovably staring at him through the bedroom window. Freud's interpretation of the dream content is not crucial here; what matters is the fact that he himself openly acknowledges that it is unimportant what actual event in the past triggered the illness - the retroactive causal link already provides the suficient formal interpretation of the event that has an equally traumatic effect to that which a concrete occurrence in reality could possibly have. Trauma is thus not a singular transcendental event, which stretches into the present, but a real effect of the temporal relation, through which the present retroactively alters the past, which, in turn, determines the present. For Freud, structure and history are inseparable, even the same, and the concept that overcomes their simple opposition is nothing other than retroactivity (<span class="term">Nachträglichkeit</span>).</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="34" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#34">中</a>In his interview for <span class="term">Le Figaro litteraire</span>, Lacan evokes the following crucial passage from his Rome discourse, which addresses the relation between the unconscious and history: ‘The unconscious is the chapter of my history that is marked by a blank or occupied by a lie: it is the censored chapter. But the truth can be refound; most often it has already been written elsewhere’. First, the truth is written on the subject's body, as the materiality of alienation and of discursive production. The unconscious is marked by an antagonism and contradiction, whose witnesses are censorship and lie, these specific features of the Freudian unconscious, in comparison to others, which contain no structural conflict but most often merely a mental archive of unclear representations and archetypes. The entire originality of the Freudian method depends on the discovery of this conflictual reality in the unconscious:<span class="quote"><a id="35" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#35">中</a>For if the originality of the method derives from the means it foregoes, it is because the means that it reserves for itself suffice to constitute a domain whose limits define the relativity of its operations. Its means are those of speech, insofar as speech confers a meaning on the functions of the individual; its domain is that of concrete discourse qua field of the subject's transindividual reality; and its operations are those of history, insofar as <span class="term">history constitutes the emergence of truth in the real</span>.</span><a id="36" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#36">中</a>Freud establishes the link between truth, history and contradiction, thereby proposing, just as Marx and Hegel had before him, a conception of history in terms of the movement of contradiction that constitutes the subject in the discrepancy with consciousness. Freud attributes to this contradiction a real status, indicating that history not only contains a difference between reality (in the sense of factuality) and the real but also manifests the impossibility of their integral overlapping. The truth that emerges in the real is clearly not the relational and adequate truth of cognition but the conflictual truth of social relations, and therefore a political truth. The evocation of truth is crucial, as the significance of  Marx’s critique for psychoanalysis will be associated with his invention of the social symptom as a specific truth-formation. It also indicates a notion of structure that is no longer Saussure's neutral system of differences without a subject.</p>
	<h2 id="part_2"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">S</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">AUSSURE AND POLITICAL ECONOMY</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="37" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#37">中</a>In his <span class="term">Course in General Linguistics</span>, Saussure draws a strong analogy between linguistics and political economy. He justifies it by reminding the reader that both disciplines can be considered sciences of value. And though linguistic value is not the same as economic value, Saussure suggests that they share a common logical background. Value can only emerge from the difference between two signs. Where there is difference, there is value; the latter therefore can neither be grounded in the relation to the signified nor in the qualitative aspect of a commodity, its use-value. This isolation of value already reflects the absolute autonomy of the system of differences. With it, Saussure provided a strong foundation for the later structuralist readings of Marx. The signifier and exchange-value become indistinguishable.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="38" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#38">中</a>Yet an important complication emerges here, since for Marx commodity is not a simple notion. The first volume of <span class="term">Capital</span> begins precisely by focusing on its complexity, which reveals an equivocity that has wide-reaching structural and social implications. The close examination of the commodity form shows that commodity, a seemingly unproblematic empirical object, is divided on use-value and exchange-value. This split within the commodity on the qualitative and the quantitative aspect is reflected in the split between qualities and form, or as Jean-Claude Milner rephrased it, between <span class="term">qualities without matter</span> and <span class="term">matter without qualities</span>. Milner's specification is intimately linked with the new conceptualisation of materiality in the universe of modern science, where matter no longer designates a positive substance, defined by a collection of empirical qualities (such as solidity, extension, consistency) but becomes a geometrised and subsequently mathematised abstraction. An element of matter is an abstract theoretical object isolated from empirical observation. The dematerialisation of matter, its progressive detachment from positive qualities, which still imply a relation of the object to the human observer, reaches its peak in quantum mechanics. But this is no place to go in a detailed account of this historical development. What is important here is that the scientific distinction between matter and empirical qualities leads directly to the non-empirical materiality of commodities and of the relations between commodities that Marx isolates in his analysis of commodity form.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="39" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#39">中</a>Let us continue with the split of the commodity that Saussure actually excludes from the linguistic science of values. Use-value and the empirical qualities of the products of labour may be of lesser importance, but this notion significantly supports Marx's account of the equivocity of commodities and the necessary illusions that result from their double character. Use-value makes every commodity appear as an object that can satisfy a need precisely through its qualities. This need does not necessarily precede a commodity but can also be fabricated together with the product.  Consequently, every commodity is an articulation of use-value and exchange-value, no matter how abstract the produced object (services, websites, smartphone apps and so on). Commodity has to be tied at least to a fantasy of quality, which represents the minimal ground for the production of a corresponding need. The immediate conclusion is that the need is not some quasi-natural and non-symbolic tendency but already comprises symbolic mediation. Even if commodities are not produced with the aim of satisfying human needs but first and foremost to support exchange and stimulate consumption, one of the cornerstones of production of value, they have to maintain the fiction of usefulness and need, no matter how abstract, futile and fantasmatic. It is precisely the fantasy that supports the union of use-value and exchange-value, matter without qualities and qualities without matter, two heterogeneous and unrelated levels. The dimension of exchange and the circulation of commodities immediately imply that commodities lose the exclusive and seemingly univocal feature of addressing human needs (adequate relation between products and needs) and that another aspect of production steps into the foreground, the production of value, through which one finally enters the autonomy of the system of differences. Simultaneously, both exchange and the market turn commodity from a unique object into a mass product, thereby exposing a repetition, that cannot be associated with the dimension of use-value or, more precisely, that complicates the relation between the usefulness and the exchange.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="40" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#40">中</a>A commodity thus contains a double and not a single difference. Besides the split between use-value and exchange-value, there is also the difference that is exchange-value as such. Use-value manifests in the relation between commodity and consumption, making of the former both the sign of a need and the sign of a psychological subject, to whom the need can be attributed. Exchange-value, however, concerns the relation between commodities themselves and is apparently without a subject. Marx then shows that this is not the case because in the world of commodities there is one commodity that forms an exception: labour-power, the only commodity producing commodity. This exception means that exchange-value is <span class="term">not</span> without any subject whatsoever but only without a subject of need (psychological or empirical subject). The labour theory of value that Marx adopts from his predecessors (Smith and Ricardo) now determines the subject of value and can be read as Marx's theory of the subject.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="41" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#41">中</a>The first lesson of Marx's science of value is thus already doubled: the difference between use-value and exchange-value uncovers the autonomy of value and defines value as difference to another value. At this point, Marx's critique of political economy seems to overlap with Saussure. Although this lesson implies an immediate corollary: exchange-value is not without a subject, but this subject is not the same as the subject of use-value (need). Exchange-value is not merely a vertical relation between value-signifier and commodity-signified but also a representation of the subject of exchange, which can be presupposed in all commodities and which Marx associates with labour-power. Saussure does not draw this conclusion, and in this respect Lacan's deduction of the subject from the logic of the signifier already in the first return to Freud exceeded the strict epistemological frames of structural linguistics.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="42" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#42">中</a>The science of value thus begins already at the level of the non-symbolic use-value that seemingly precedes exchange. Marx's critique starts from the political-economic idea of <span class="term">Warenkunde</span>, expertise-knowledge of commodities, and the science of values is supposed to form a subset of this discipline. ‘In bourgeois society’, Marx writes in a footnote, ‘the legal fiction prevails that each person, as a buyer, has an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities’. Everyone enters the market with a presupposed knowledge, precisely as <span class="term">homo oeconomicus</span>, who presumably possesses spontaneous knowledge of his/her private interests, and above all as a value-scientist. For Marx, this presupposition is built on shaky ground, because it treats everyone as subjects of cognition. The presupposed knowledge of economic subjects is first tested in the way people relate to commodities, in commodity fetishism, where Marx again shows that the difference between use-value and exchange-value implies two incompatible and heterogeneous subjects, of which one is the centralised subject of need, interest and positive knowledge, and the other the decentralised and non-psychological subject of value. But what matters for now is that, whether we speak of linguistic or economic values, linguistic exchange or economic exchange, knowledge is already presupposed for the subject. This knowledge is not necessarily reflected but is most certainly at work in the way commodities and values relate to one other, and also in the way everyone relates to commodities, in the action of structure as well as in the actions of men.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="43" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#43">中</a>Linguistics and political economy enter these relations between values and commodities, between signifiers and signified, where they first encounter the double character of their values. An additional factor complicates the matter for both sciences of values. Saussure notes that linguistics and political economy are internally doubled, not because the notion of value contains a qualitative and a quantitative dimension but because the quantitative dimension marks their scientific object with temporality. History re-enters the structure. The field of value is stained with constant change that makes values vary over time. The oscillation of value reveals 'inflation' in the Other, a structural dynamic and instability in the system. In order to illustrate this point, Saussure first gives examples of sciences in which time does not cause particular complications in the structure of their field and of their object. Such is the case with astronomy, which investigates changes in the composition of stars, whereby the temporality of these changes does not call for an inner differentiation of astronomy as such; the same goes for geology, which explores different geological epochs but can easily switch to the description of unchangeable states. The temporal shift does not alter the object of research and the laws behind the changes are considered stable.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="44" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#44">中</a>All these conditions of scientificity change in the framework of linguistics and political economy, where the object transforms depending on whether we think it within or without temporality, meaning also within or without the relation to the subject. Political economy and economic history form two separate disciplines within one science, and the same goes for static linguistics and evolutionary linguistics. This already indicates that linguistic and economic models do not have universal validity. They are always-already historically and geographically limited, something that critical economists will willingly admit. This limitation of economic models is closely related to the instability of the market, the same structural instability that marks the field of language, a feature on which Lacan will build his theory of the barred Other.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="45" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#45">中</a>As previously mentioned, the immanent split in both sciences of value is caused by the temporal factor that is associated with the social dimension of exchange: ‘Both sciences are concerned with a <span class="term">system for equating things of different orders</span> - labour and wages in one and a signified and signifier in the other.’ The parallelism does not stop here. Just as political economy handles the difference between exchange-value and use-value, Saussure introduces an analogical difference between linguistic value and meaning. Meaning still presupposes a relation between speakers, whereas linguistic value implies an autonomous relation between signifiers themselves. Value relations go unbeknownst to the speaker and to the production of meaning, and in order to attain this level of language linguistics needs to abstract language from speech. Saussure summarises this gesture in the famous thesis that the object of linguistics, <span class="term">la langue</span>, is <span class="term">le langage</span> (language) minus <span class="term">la parole</span> (speech). Only once this operation has been made can language appear as an abstract system of differences. To say that in language there are only differences means that what we normally experience as language contains two heterogeneous aspects and even two different languages, the language of values and the language of meaning. When humans communicate among themselves they unknowingly speak the language of values, a language that does not communicate meaning, and the question is whether it communicates at all. The autonomy of the signifier stands for a noncommunicative kernel of linguistic communication.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="46" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#46">中</a>Let us return to Saussure's example, which serves to illustrate the coincidence of linguistic and economic value. Saussure claims that from the perspective of value the relation of labour to wage is homological to the relation between the signified and the signifier. At this point, we can already note that Saussure was not exactly fortunate in his choice of example. He overlooked the problematic character of this comparison, as he did not refer to just any economic relation but to the most problematic commodity exchange that puts the entirety of political economy into question. He thus chose an example that, for Marx, reveals the symptomatic status of labour-power in the commodity universe and in economic exchange. Saussure's analogy repeats the same mistake that Marx criticised in classical political economy: what is bought and sold on the market is not a process (labour) but a specific commodity (labour-power). But let us take a few steps back here.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="47" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#47">中</a>Because temporality cannot be entirely eliminated from the field of value, the system of equivalences can take two directions. The equation can concern things here and now, as well as things in temporal succession. If it concerns the present state of things, it pictures the market as a static constellation of actually existing commodities; we are, then, dealing with political economy as the grammar of market relations. If, however, the equation relates to the temporal succession of things, it comprises not only exchange but also production and relations of production. Or, to link it back to Saussure's formula, temporality reintroduces speech into language. Here, the split produced by the notion of value finally receives its full weight. Saussure illustrates it with the intersection of two axes: the axis of simultaneity, which designates the relations between coexisting things and from which the dimension of time is excluded; and the axis of succession, 'on which only one thing can be considered at a time but upon which all the things on the first axis together with their changes are located’. In linguistics, this distinction is absolute and imperative, for ‘language is a system of pure values, which are determined by nothing except the momentary arrangement of its terms’. This distinction is therefore necessary in a field that has no external determination or from which it is impossible to extricate oneself. Language and the market are two fields that know no Outside. Because of this absoluteness, discussion of them is only possible by splitting them into their temporal and atemporal aspects. Value can become a scientific object only if language and market are separated from their temporality, for this temporality reveals that their structure is more paradoxical than it may appear. Because they have no exteriority, they are not whole. Because they are not whole, they are internally barred. And, consequently, because they are barred, they do not know positive existence. The Other (Language, Market) does not exist. For linguistics, it is necessary to construct its object, language, by separating it from temporality, but, simultaneously, this separation excludes the problematic existence of language that follows directly from the negativity of the signifier. Similarly, political economy has to construct the field of its object, the market, which is presupposed in its positive existence, that is, as a fully constituted and homeostatic order that follows stable laws and whose functioning is more or less predictable and translatable into mathematical language. Adam Smith's ‘invisible hand of the market’ brings together both features, whereby the persistence of this originary metaphor in contemporary economic debates testifies that the hypothesis of the Other's existence is aliveand well. To the economic Other we send positive signals, in the form of reforms and austerity measures that should calm its instable and capricious character. For linguistics and for political economy, the Other <span class="term">does</span> exist, at least as the idea of a logically predictable and self-regulating system of values.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="48" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#48">中</a>The structural and logical overlapping of commodity exchange and language, value and signifier, also stands at the very unfolding of the critique of political economy. In the section on commodity fetishism, which concludes the first chapter of <span class="term">Capital</span>, Marx addresses the cognitive consequences of the autonomy of exchange-value through the idea of commodity language. He demonstrates this language at work in the well-known prosopopoeia of commodities: <span class="quote"><a id="49" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#49">中</a>If commodities could speak, they would say this: our use-value may interest men, but does not belong to us as objects. What does belong to us as objects, however, is our value. Our own intercourse as commodities proves it. We relate to each other merely as exchange-values.</span><a id="50" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#50">中</a>From the double character of commodities it seemingly follows that language is situated in exchange-value, while use-value stands outside language. The critical axis of the idea of commodity language, by contrast, consists in the fact that it places the couple of use-value and exchange-value in language, thereby determining the relation between two linguistic levels, human language and commodity language, communication and autonomous difference, or, to put it with Saussure, meaning and value. Besides structurally linking exchange and language, Marx also situates the specific structural effect of the commodity split, which immediately follows from the primacy of exchange-value over use-value: the seemingly intrinsic character of value. After commodities have said their piece, Marx leaves the word to political economists, where it turns out that economists are actually not the ones who speak but, rather, it is commodities, which continue their <span class="term">parole</span> through the mouths of political economists and the theories of political economy:<span class="quote"><a id="51" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#51">中</a>Now listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist. ‘Value’ (i.e., exchange-value) is a property of things, riches (i.e., use-value) of man. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not’. ‘Riches (use-value) are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable ... A pearl or a diamond is valuable as a pearl or a diamond’.</span><a id="52" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#52">中</a>A strange ventriloquism is at stake in political economy. Marx unveils that there is an immediate continuity, equivocity, inseparability between commodity language and human language. He quotes the British utilitarian philosopher and economist Samuel Bailey, whose words demonstrate that the commodity language is not to be taken as a metaphor; the prosopopoeia of commodities does not assume the status of a rhetorical fiction but simply <span class="term">is</span> language in action. <span class="term">Ca parle</span>: it, the commodity, speaks. Commodity language turns out to be a pleonasm, for the economists simply repeat the appearance that is produced by the autonomy of exchange. The appearance of value being intrinsic to commodities is thus a logical consequence of the autonomy of exchange-value and demonstrates the structural overlapping of commodity language, the way commodities communicate among themselves through values, and human language, the way signifiers relate to one another behind human communication. When Marx speaks of commodity fetishism, he does not envisage some ‘generalised perversion’ but a minimal shift between the appearance and the logical autonomy of value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="53" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#53">中</a>The inseparability of human language and commodity language anticipates an important Lacanian axiom, ‘There is no such thing as a metalanguage’, or, put differently, there is no criterion that would delimit the autonomy of the system of differences, which implies the primacy of the relation between signifiers over their relation to the signified, and thereby over the communicative and referential dimension of language. Language is not univocity but equivocity, not a relation but the paradigmatic example of non-relation. And because there is no such thing as metalanguage, there is no language either. The linguistic and the economic system form an open set. Consequently, the inexistence of a metalanguage (the Other of the Other) and the inexistence of the Other are one and the same.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="54" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#54">中</a>From the equivocity and the inseparability of human language and commodity language and from the structural overlapping of economic and linguistic value, which is the signifier as difference or relation to another signifier, Marx deduces the constitution of subjectivity that is coded under the expression ‘commodity fetishism’, a subjectivity that is marked by a structurally determined misunderstanding. Thus, Marx accentuates the difference between the speaker and the subject, between the subject implied by use-value (the psychological and empirical subject of cognition) and the subject of exchange-value, whose place is in the autonomy of the system of differences and which is therefore decentralised and metonymic. Marx's analysis of commodity fetishism thus contains two elements, the signifier-as-cause and the alienated subject, the material consequence of the autonomy of value. To reiterate, the idea of a commodity language implies that commodity exchange is structured like a language. This openly linguistic meaning of Marx's critique of fetishism was apparent for Lacan, who detected the affinity of the critique of political economy with structuralism already in his early teaching, anticipating Althusser's structural Marxism:<span class="quote"><a id="55" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#55">中</a>It is enough to open the first volume of <span class="term">Capital</span> in order to become aware that the first step of Marx's analysis of the fetish character of commodity consists precisely in the fact that he addresses the problem on the level of the signifer as such, even if the term itself remains unpronounced.</span><a id="56" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#56">中</a>Marx starts from the autonomy of exchange in order to deduce the specific form of subjectivity that this autonomy inevitably produces. This deduction demonstrates the dependency of the subject on the signifier: the system of differences, commodity exchange, the way in which commodities communicate among themselves, shapes the subject independently from every reference to the consumer. This hidden aspect of subjectivation is then exemplified in commodity fetishism, the political-economic mystification of the source of value, which strives to hold apart both flip sides of structural causality: production of (surplus) value and production of (alienated) subjectivity. According to the fetishist position commodities are endowed with intrinsic value, although this misunderstanding is objective and not subjective. The autonomy of the system of differences necessarily produces the appearance that value is a positive quality of things and that it is without a subject, or, better, that it is its own subject. Commodity fetishism consequently evolves into the fetishisation of capital, in which financial abstractions seemingly engender each other independently from any negative subject of value. Capital becomes the privileged description for a spectral life without negativity. The case of Samuel Bailey is merely an exemplification of how each individual spontaneously relates to commodities. In each consumer there is a political economist, the presupposed subject of cognition, for which one assumes an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities - <span class="term">homo oeconomicus</span>, this ideal subject of the economic science of value. In the end, the hypothesis of this ideal subjectivity makes political economy blind for the structurally generated fetishisations -and the task of critique, as Marx repeatedly demonstrates, is precisely to think the production of value together with the production of fantasies of production of value. Differently put, political economy still engages in the quest for the origin of value, in relation to which it can only produce more or less scientific myths. Critique of political economy, in contrast, abolishes this quest and focuses instead on the interdependency of exploitation and fetishisation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="57" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#57">中</a>The speech of commodities comes suspiciously close to the way Saussure treats the signs that compose language, without the reference to temporality. This does not mean that Saussure's relation to language is fetishist, but it does mean that by (unknowingly) repeating the political-economic lapsus, he restricts linguistics to the register of exchange, leaving the connection between linguistic representation and linguistic production unthematised. By failing to envisage the difference between labour-process and labour-power, as well as between labour-power and other commodities, Saussure situates production outside the science of language. For him, language knows no surplus and the use of language remains throughout communicative and meaningful. This will eventually become the central point of Lacan's critique of Saussure:<span class="quote"><a id="58" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#58">中</a>Communication implies reference. But one thing is clear - language is merely what scientific discourse elaborates to account for what I call <span class="term">lalangue</span>. Language serves purposes that are altogether different from that of communication . . . If communication approaches what is effectively at work in the <span class="term">jouissance</span> of lalanguage, it is because communication implies a reply, in other words, dialogue. But does lalanguage serve, first and foremost, to dialogue? As I have said before, nothing is less certain.</span><a id="59" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#59">中</a>Saussure is affirmed and negated in one and the same gesture. The autonomy of the signifer as such implies a restriction of the communicative dimension of language, and hence of the linguistic use-value (meaning, relation to the signified). What Lacan here describes as lalanguage is already the result ofa shift from Saussure to Marx. The distinction between language and lalanguage now covers the difference between linguistic meaning and the autonomy of the signifier. <span class="term">Lalangue</span> stands entirely on the side of this autonomy, negating the primacy of communication and relationality (dialogue). The signifier appears here first and foremost an apparatus of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. The autonomy in question, the kernel of Saussure's discovery, provides the necessary ground for the passage from language to lalanguage, but this cannot take place without introducing the subject and the surplus-object. Lacan's second return to Freud thus ends up extending the autonomy of the signifier to the Marxist problematic of the mode of production.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="60" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#60">中</a>In Saussure, the introduction of synchronicity and diachronicity articulated the split within linguistics(static linguistics and evolutionary linguistics) and within its object. Language is both state <span class="term">and</span> movement. Linguistics confronts here an impossible dilemma: if it aims at the static, atemporal aspect of language, it loses an important aspect of its object, the production of linguistic value; and if it focuses on temporality, it has to admit that language does not exist, meaning that it deals with an unstable and paradoxical object. In the first case, linguistics becomes a ‘pondering of knowledge on lalanguage’,  whereby language turns out to be a scientific fiction, a construct of linguistic knowledge; in the second case; linguistics cannot fully account for communication since the unity of language (<span class="term">lalangue</span>) dissolves in the multiplicity of ‘private’ languages (<span class="term">lalangue</span>). This dichotomy of language and speech is what Lacan criticised in Saussurean linguistics and instead strived to construct a linguistics, renamed <span class="term">linguisterie</span>, that would take language ‘more seriously’, considering the ‘life’ of language, its temporal as well as causal dimension. Lacan here seems to be in accord with Deleuze's later remark that linguistics has done a lot of harm’, notably when it separated language from production, not seeing that it was an essential aspect of the autonomy of the signifier. One cannot have language without its inherent instability. The same critical position directs Marx's relation to political economy.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="61" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#61">中</a>Political economy, too, reveals its insuficiency because it cannot account for the production of value without the implicit fetishisation of commodities, money and capital - another pondering of knowledge, which ascribes value to commodities, to money and, at the most abstract level, to the immediate productivity of fictitious capital. <span class="term">Geld heckendes Geld</span>, money-breeding money, as Marx writes, is the main fetishist fantasy that emerges from the autonomy of value, and it is therefore not a surprise that this fantasy of self-engendering stands in the core of all capitalist fetishisms and becomes a driving force of financialisation. This financial vitalism can only be supported on the basis of the foreclosure of negativity, of the split that marks the subject of value and through it the entire commodity universe. However, the critical point is not simply to reintroduce production into language but to expose its double aspect, the mutual dependency of production of the negative subject and the primitive surplus-object.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="62" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#62">中</a>Saussure nevertheless tried to theorise the temporal and the atemporal aspect of language when he compared the inscription of language in the intersection of synchronicity and diachronicity with a chess game. This comparison combines the static and the dynamic dimension of language, showing that the value of particular elements depends on their position on the chessboard. It illustrates the link between value and difference, and with it Saussure rejects something that we might call linguistic fetishism, an attempt to conceive language as a ‘language of being’ (Heidegger) or, put differently, an endeavour to establish a relation and continuity between linguistic value and meaning.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="63" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#63">中</a>In the history of philosophy, we find two prominent versions of such fetishism, which oriented the philosophical relation to language. First in <span class="term">Cratylus</span>, in which Plato strived to illustrate the mimetic relation between words and things, and thus to theorise linguistic value in correspondence to the natural connection between the signifier and the reference:<span class="quote"><a id="64" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#64">中</a>Then, as to names, ought not our legislator also to know how to put the true natural name of each thing into sounds and syllables, and to make and give all names with a view to the ideal name, if  he is to be a namer in any true sense?</span><a id="65" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#65">中</a>The mythic figure of the namer translates <span class="term">physis</span> into language without any loss. The development of the entire dialogue amounts to the idea that language stands in a harmonious mimetic relation to nature, so that even in its basic components, the phonemes, we encounter an imitation of natural sounds, qualities and states. Plato tries to provide a mythical proof that the relation between the signifier and the signified is as such rooted in nature (<span class="term">physis</span>, being), and that signifiers always-already mean something <span class="term">in</span> and <span class="term">from</span> themselves, that they are necessarily referential and that language is essentially communication, language of being, in which every letter follows from a natural sound, state or quality. Plato hereby formulated a mythical version of what would later become the doctrine of <span class="term">adaequatio</span>, adequate relation between words and things.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="66" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#66">中</a>Another case of linguistic fetishism, and even another founding myth of linguistics, emerges with the pragmatic tradition stretching from Aristotle to Habermas. Although this pragmatism does not postulate any natural or substantial link between <span class="term">logos</span> and <span class="term">physis</span>, the signifier and being, it nevertheless continues to presuppose that the nature of language consists in stable referentiality and a normative form of communication. Language is defined as <span class="term">organon</span> (tool, organ), and even if this conception seems to reduce language to its communicational use-value, we again come across the same hypothesis as in Plato's mythical rootedness of the signifier in the ideal name: the signifier, in itself, supports a relation between the words and the things, the symbolic and the real. There is no surplus in language; the former comes from elsewhere, for Aristotle from the sophistic misuse of language, for Wittgenstein from false philosophical problems.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="67" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#67">中</a>For both Plato and Aristotle, there is more at stake here than the problem of language. The same dilemma is encountered in economy through chrematistics and usury, where money becomes its own telos and enrichment for enrichment’s sake the only economic imperative. The true issue concerns the denaturalisation of social links through the autonomy of the signifier and value, and the rejection of the idea that the human community is grounded on a stable social relation. How do we delimit the good and the bad use of language and money? How do we guarantee the overlapping of value and meaning and simultaneously prevent another possible overlapping, the one between value and <span class="term">jouissance</span>, which negates the former and threatens to dissolve the social link? For Plato and Aristotle, the paradigmatic case of the good use of language is communication but even more so philosophy, the language of ontology, spoken by philosophers and moreover by being as such. In a certain sense ontology understands itself as one immense prosopopoeia of being. The ideal functioning of language consequently takes place in the highest form of <span class="term">philia</span>, the love of wisdom, which is also a form of friendship, a social link. The ontological language of being is rooted on the axiom professed by the Parmenidian Goddess: being is, non-being is not, which makes of <span class="term">language without negativity</span> one of the main philosophicalideals. Precisely this negativity, however, is what Marx and Freud encounter at the other end of metaphysics in the fetishist disavowal of alienation and of castration.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="68" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#68">中</a>In contradistinction to the language of being and to the ideal of a language without negativity stands the language of the sophists and poets, where enjoyment, seduction and equivocity question the primacy of communication and external referentiality. If the language of ontology is a prosopopoeia of being, then the language of sophistry is a prosopopoeia of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. The signifier is no longer the bearer of meaning but an apparatus of <span class="term">jouissance</span> and a tool of deception. It remains an <span class="term">organon</span> but serves other purposes. The supposedly natural link between the signifier and the signified is suspended, and <span class="term">jouissance</span> invades their intermediate space, uncovering the autonomy of the signifier and production in language. In the extreme case, this <span class="term">jouissance</span> dissolves the dialogue and the social link, leading to a discursive self-abolition, as in the case of Cratylus, who is said to have abandoned all language and merely moved his index finger. The denaturation of language into an apparatus of <span class="term">jouissance</span> makes of sophists ‘human plants’, but it also makes them speak only for the pleasure in speaking. In the figure of the sophist two extremes coincide, pure babbling, on the one hand, and pure silence, on the other, the life and the death of language, Joyce and Cratylus.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="69" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#69">中</a>What sophistry is in relation to language, chrematistics is in relation to money. It detaches money from its social function, turning it into an obscene self-reproducing entity. Exchange turns from the metaphor of social relation into a means of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. Buying and selling should reflect and realise the idea of social relation. But the sophist and the usurer do not reflect or imitate anything; at the background of their actions there is neither eternal idea nor normative structure. The delimitation of the normal and the pathological functioning of linguistic and economic apparatus is an impossible task that calls for a fantasmatic foundation of the presupposed relation. Plato and Aristotle’s attempt rejects the topological problem, according to which the border between the signifier and <span class="term">jouissance</span> is both nowhere and everywhere in the system of differences. From the philosophical condemnation of chrematistics and sophistry, it follows that the main point of philosophical repression is the intimate connection between communication and production in language. In order to ground the homeostatic vision of language (language as a language of being), Plato and Aristotle produce the fantasy of a 'subject supposed to enjoy'. Psychoanalysis and the critique of political economy, however, reveal that the autonomy of the signifier and of value should not be exaggerated - the presumed autism of <span class="term">jouissance</span> in language and the autism of fictitious capital are the privileged targets of both the Lacanian and Marxian critiques. A sensationalist dramatisation of the problem misinterprets the autonomy of the signifer and of value and walks straight into their immediate fetishisation. The key problem remains the discrepancy between communication and <span class="term">jouissance</span>. If communication implies a response, this does not suggest that this response in turn implies an ideal communicative model, on which the pragmatic tradition strives to ground the fantasy of a consistently regulated and stable social relation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="70" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#70">中</a>By comparing language with chess, Saussure strived to show that the system of differences is merely temporary and depends on the formal rules of the game, which remain unaltered. The passage from one synchronicity to another takes place with each move, establishing a new distribution of figures and new relations, thereby changing their values. However, Saussure expresses the following reservation:<span class="quote"><a id="71" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#71">中</a>At only one point is the comparison weak: the chess player <span class="term">intends</span> to bring about a shift and thereby to exert an action on the system, whereas language premeditates nothing. The pieces of language are shifted - or rather modified - spontaneously and fortuitously. . . In order to make the game of chess seem at every point like the functioning of language, we would have to presuppose an unconscious or unintelligent player.</span><a id="72" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#72">中</a>For Saussure, there is no unconscious intention; intentions can only be associated to consciousness, hence to the subject of cognition. The border that would support the integral overlapping of chess and language is nothing other than the unconscious, but then another figure of subjectivity would have to be introduced. Here Freud's discoveries receive their full weight. Returning to Freud through Saussure is possible only under the condition that the <span class="term">Interpretation of Dreams</span> drew a strict equivalence, in all points, between chess and language, thereby making the move that radicalised the implications of the autonomy of the signifier. Yet, in presupposing an unconscious player, Freud also checkmated Saussure, as the unconscious introduces a serious complication in the conception of structure: it names the instability of structural relations, by connecting both aspects of the autonomy of the signifier, representation and production. The issue is additionally complicated by the fact that the unconscious is split between unconscious desire and the dream work. The latter comprises all the mechanisms that manipulate the conscious and preconscious material and are homologous to linguistic operations. But these mechanisms serve to produce the object of satisfaction. The Freudian unconscious player turns out to be marked by a conflict, which makes the presupposed intention appear in its inconsistency. In order to illustrate this split, Freud will refer to nothing other than political economy:<span class="quote"><a id="73" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#73">中</a>A daytime thought may very well play the part of <span class="term">entrepreneur</span> for a dream; but the <span class="term">entrepreneur</span>, who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to carry it out, can do nothing without the capital; he needs a <span class="term">capitalist</span> who can afford the outlay, and the capitalist who provides the psychical outlay for the dream is invariably and indisputably, whatever maybe the thoughts of the previous day, <span class="term">a wish from the unconscious</span>.</span><a id="74" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#74">中</a>In this excerpt, Freud focuses on the relation between unconscious desire and the day's remains, the dream work being excluded from the comparison. But, given the substantial role of the dream work in <span class="term">Interpretation of Dreams</span>, we can tentatively claim that what Freud encounters in the unconscious appears to be homologous to the capitalist social link; it is the same contradiction as that between the capitalist and the labourer. With this distinction, Freud separates the intention from the subject. Unconscious desire and dream work are intentions <span class="term">without</span> a subject - and we can recall at this point that Freud defines dream work as a process that neither thinks, calculates, nor judges, in short as pure intention. The subject of the unconscious, however, is a subject <span class="term">without</span> intention, a decentralised and metonymic subject that is represented in the relation between linguistic and economic values. To anticipate later discussions, the subject without intention is produced in the difference between the repressed signifier of unconscious tendency (S1) and all other signifiers among which the operations of the dream work take place (S2). The problem of subjective transformation in analysis calls for a short circuit between the subject without intention and the intention without subject, between the decentralised subject of unconscious and the no less decentralised unconscious labour.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="75" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#75">中</a>It is here that another crucial aspect of Lacan's later critique of Saussure enters the picture, this time regarding the arbitrariness of the sign. By defining the relation between the signifier and the signified as arbitrary, Saussure moved beyond the linguistic fetishism of his predecessors. The idea of arbitrariness implies that nothing within the signified unites it to the series of sounds that constitute the signifier. Lacan's first return to Freud radicalised Saussure by isolating the signifier from the Saussurean sign and thereby exposed the kernel of linguistic autonomy. The second return to Freud took a step further by isolating in arbitrariness its true logical modality, which Saussure did not accentuate sufficiently, namely contingency:<span class="quote"><a id="76" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#76">中</a>For no signifier is produced as eternal. That is no doubt what, rather than qualifying it as arbitrary, Saussure could have formulated - it would have been better to qualify the signifier with the category of contingency. The signifier repudiates the category of the eternal and, nevertheless, oddly enough, it is intrinsically. Isn't it clear to you that it participates, to employ a Platonic approach, in that nothing on the basis of which something entirely original was made <span class="term">ex nihilo</span>, as creationism tells us?</span><a id="77" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#77">中</a><span class="term">Contingent is what participates in nothing.</span> We can immediately note the scandal this subversion of participation has not only for Platonism but also for Christianity, the religion of the <span class="term">creatio ex nihilo</span>. Participation in nothing introduces a strange hybrid of Plato and creationism. On the one hand, it evokes Plato's doctrine of the participation of appearances in eternal ideas. But the weakness of this doctrine consists in the conclusion that these ideas again participate in the highest Good. Plato thereby mystified the 'impenetrable void', the negativity of the cut, in which every signifier participates. On the other hand, the proposed definition of contingency corrects Plato's doctrine of participation with the idea of creation of the world out of nothing. Of course, this does not suggest that Lacan simply accepts the creationist model, since creationism still understands God, not simply as the Other but as the Other of the Other (the Other of Creation). For this reason, creationism is incapable of really thinking the radical contingency of the act of creation, which would in itself have to undermine the religious hypothesis of the Other of the Other and make creation appear as non-whole, or not thoroughly constituted ontologically. From the viewpoint of contingency, God cannot be the eternal Creator but falls on the side of the effects of the created: ‘God is unconscious' (<span class="term">Seminar XI</span>),  'God comprises the integrity of the effects of language' (<span class="term">Seminar XXII</span>), and finally the neologism <span class="term">dieure</span> introduced in <span class="term">Seminar XX</span>, which brings together God (<span class="term">dieu</span>) and saying (<span class="term">dire</span>). Both atheism and materialism are situated between Plato and creationism.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="78" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#78">中</a>The introduction of contingency as a participation in nothing is a corollary to the autonomy of the signifier and indicates a double move beyond Saussurean epistemic coordinates:<span class="quote"><a id="79" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#79">中</a>To say that the signifier is arbitrary does not have the same range as to simply say that it bears no relation to its effect of the signifed, for the former involves slipping into another reference. The word ‘reference’, in this case, can only be situated on the basis of what discourse constitutes by way of a link. The signifier as such refers to nothing if not to a discourse, in other words, a mode of functioning or a utilisation of language qua link.</span><a id="80" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#80">中</a>Situating the signifier as difference already provides the minimal definition of the social link, under the condition that this definition includes the subject: ‘The signifier is what represents a subject to another signifier’. The contingency of the signifier demonstrates that the mode in which language functions is in no way grounded on a necessary background that would guarantee its immanent stability and relation to an external reference. No invisible hand, no relation to nature, and finally no eternal creator, to whom we could ascribe <span class="term">creatio ex nihilo</span>. Historically it makes sense that Plato tried to explain the creation of signifiers out of <span class="term">physis</span>, since for Greeks <span class="term">creatio ex nihilo</span> was unthinkable. Moreover, the radicality of <span class="term">creatio ex nihilo</span> is not entirely thinkable for Christianity either, insofar as religion still ascribes the act of creation to a presupposed Other of the Other, which supports and guarantees the consistency of the created Other(language, reality). <span class="term">Creatio ex nihilo</span>, contingency in the entirety of its rigour, only becomes thinkable in the universe of modern science, where the autonomy of the signifier is not only discovered but also formalised.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="81" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#81">中</a>The creation of the signifier out of nothing contains a twofold thesis on anguage and on social reality, for we are speaking of the use of language as a link. If the signifier bears no relation to the signified, then the social link, too, is not grounded on a stable background but is internally broken: there is no social relation. Or, to retranslate this axiom into Marx's language, all history is history of class struggles, whereby the plurality of class struggles specifies that the class struggle is not a transhistoric essence that would unify the historic movement and make of History a secularised Other of the Other.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="82" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#82">中</a>With the introduction of arbitrariness, Saussure only partially uncovered the immanent instability of language. It is precisely for this reason too that the axioms of Lacan's second return to Freud, ‘The unconscious is history’ and ‘The unconscious is politics’, cannot be associated to Saussurean structuralism without modifying the very notion of structure. The imperative of structural linguistics consists in thinking language through the opposition of structure and life, without reference to the subject, while its object is constructed through the subtraction of language from speech. With this operation, Saussure grounded linguistics on an operation that Lacan will elsewhere describe as 'repression of the subject’: the science of language treats the latter as if no subject would speak it. For linguistics, negativity does not speak, and its object is more like a language of immaterial beings, language without a body. On the contrary, the move from the signifier to the social link necessarily implies a theory of the subject:<span class="quote"><a id="83" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#83">中</a>We must still indicate here what this link means. The link. . . is a link between those who speak. You can immediately see where we are headed it's not just anyone who speaks, of course; it's beings, beings we are used to qualifying as living, and it would, perhaps, be rather difficult to exclude the dimension of life from those who speak. But we immediately realise that this dimension simultaneously brings in that of death, and that a radical signifying ambiguity results from this.</span><a id="84" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#84">中</a>Discourse does not only presuppose living bodies, it also introduces death, and hence negativity. By returning to this discursive intertwining of life and negativity, of the speaking body and the barred subject, psychoanalysis and the critique of political economy encounter the logical nexus of the autonomy of the signifier - the representation of the subject and the production of surplus.</p>
	<h2 id="part_3"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">R</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">EPRESENTATION AND PRODUCTION</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="85" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#85">中</a>Before 1968, Marx is not a major reference in Lacans teaching. His name appears only sporadically, and mainly in relation to the subject of the signifier. All this changes in the seminar following the May ’68 events, in which Lacan elaborates the homology between the object of <span class="term">Capital</span> and the object of psychoanalysis. The title of the corresponding seminar resumes the underlying orientation of Lacan's second return to Freud, <span class="term">D’un Autre a l’autre</span>: from the big Other, the field of language and the absolute autonomy of the signifier, to the small other, object <span class="term">a</span>, the object of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, but also the object that is logically associated with surplus-value. As the seminar's title already indicates, the accent is displaced from representation to production, introducing another level to the theory of the signifier. The emphasis on representation only approaches the signifier through the transcendentalism of the symbolic, where the signifier seems to be separated from <span class="term">jouissance</span> and to entail its prohibition. Subsequent orientation progressively abolishes this position and moves towards a conception of the signifier that is not simply invested with <span class="term">jouissance</span> but becomes its privileged cause and apparatus. However, the causal relation presupposes a specific labour within language. Lacan thereby returns to the revolutionary kernel of Freud's theories, his labour theory of the unconscious, which explains the satisfaction of the unconscious tendency by the consumption of ‘psychic energy’ (labour-power) in the mental process.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="86" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#86">中</a>The move from the Other of language to the other of <span class="term">jouissance</span> overlaps with the shift from Saussure, the privileged theoretician of representation, to Marx, the key theoretician of production. The linguistic Other is now envisaged through the parallax of the subjective lack and the objective surplus, the two faces of discursive production. It is more than indicative that from this point on Lacan will repeat the well-known slogan ‘The Other does not exist’. The claim should not be taken too lightly, notably not in the sense of vulgar atheism, which declares God an illusion that the progress of science necessarily abolishes. Lacan chooses a more sobering direction. Not only was the postmodern marked by an increase in religious belief, from institutionalised religions to various new-age obscurantisms, but the logic of capital, too, successfully imposes its religious component that Marx envisaged through the notion of fetishism. Lacan’s prognosis of a triumph of religion over revolutionary science and emancipatory politics meanwhile became reality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="87" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#87">中</a>‘The Other does not exist’ also contains a materialist lesson, which links inexistence of the Other and causality of the signifier, while distinguishing the linguistic Other (language, discourse) from the theological and metaphysical God (the 'Other of the Other'). While inexistence (disclosure, incompleteness) does not prevent the Other from having real consequences, the persistence of religion consists in the idealist counter-offensive, which strives to attribute the consequences in question to a positive being: as long as things are said, the God hypothesis will persist. In the context of fetishism, this means that the inexistence of the Market (the global market as an instable and antagonistic space of values) goes hand in hand with the hypothesis of the vital forces of capitalist abstractions.  It is no coincidence that Lacan speaks of the triumph of religion at the dawn of financialisation, only a couple of years after the American abolition of the Breton-Woods system that terminated the gold standard and inaugurated the era of 'free-floating' currencies. The triumph of religion has a concrete name in political economy, neoliberalism, with its wild hypothesis that the deregulation of capital liberates its ‘creative potentials’ and immanent teleology, the spontaneous tendency of the market towards equilibrium.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="88" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#88">中</a>In its theory of the Other, psychoanalysis cannot but assume the position of atheism and materialism. The move to the small other extends this positioning in a logical alliance with the critique of political economy: ‘I will proceed with a homological outlook based on Marx in order to introduce today the place where we need to situate the essential function of object <span class="term">a’</span>. The choice of terms contains an implicit criticism of Freudo-Marxism for remaining in a metaphorical or analogical framework, without exhaustively thematising the <span class="term">logical</span>, <span class="term">epistemological</span> and finally <span class="term">political continuity</span> of Marx's critique of economic discourse and Freuds elaboration of libidinal economy. The thesis is that the unconscious production of <span class="term">jouissance</span> and the social production of value follow the same logic and display the same structural contradictions, tensions and deadlocks: not repression of productive potentials of sexuality, drives and desires but the insatiable demand for production, ‘production for the sake of production’ (Marx), from which the repressed unconscious tendencies cannot be excepted.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="89" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#89">中</a>The homology in question is supposed to situate the object of psychoanalysis, now translated as surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span>, in the discursive structure. This translation is coined according to Marx's surplus-value, <span class="term">Mehrwert</span>, and Lacan even proposes a German term, <span class="term">Mehrlust</span>. The coupling of <span class="term">jouissance</span> and surplus, however, is not Lacan's invention but is already present in Freud, who, in his book on jokes, centred his analysis of unconscious satisfaction on what he called <span class="term">Lustgewinn</span>, pleasure gain. Freud thus already used the notion of the surplus-object but did not situate it logically and topologically. Subsequent development in psychoanalysis abolished the revolutionary consequences of the Freudian insight, so that Lacan's intervention aims at the same critical status as Marx with regard to the political-economic debates regarding surplus-value:<span class="quote"><a id="90" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#90">中</a>This object <span class="term">a</span>, in a certain sense I invented it, just as one can say that Marx's discourse invented something. What does this mean?Marx's discovery is surplus-value. It is not that object <span class="term">a</span> was not approached before my discourse, of course, but it was approached in an insufficient way, as insufficient as the definition of surplus-value was before Marx's discourse made it appear in all its rigour.</span><a id="91" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#91">中</a>Inventions and not discoveries, then; and what is invented is not objects, which were already known before Marx and Lacan, but a method that exposes the hidden logic of their production. Here we again come across the inseparability of materialism and logic, as both inventions contain a turn in the understanding of discourse. At the root of this logical and materialist orientation stand the aforementioned quarrel regarding discursive consequences and the notion of material cause, now associated with the signifier.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="92" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#92">中</a>Lacan leaves no doubt that his concern is solely the logical and not the analogical relation between Marx and Freud: ‘To say homology means that their relation is not analogical. It is the same thing and the same stuff, as far as it is the discursive scissor cut (<span class="term">trait de ciseau du discours</span>)’. The French phrasing alludes directly to the first chapter of <span class="term">Capital</span>, where the commodity exchange and the double character of labour are repeatedly exemplified through tailoring. What matters is the inversion of the relation between concrete labour and abstract labour, since only through this inversion can the place and the function of surplus-value in the capitalist mode ofproduction be unveiled. One of Marx's corrections of political economy resides in acknowledging the structural function of the gap between abstract and concrete labour, which depends on the double character of commodity. Through the social implementation of the commodity form, the absolute autonomy of exchange introduces a set of consequences in the subjective and the social reality. No cut is merely concrete labour; rather, it is part of a broader discursive logic that supports the capitalist organisation of labour. The action contains the central abstraction next to capital, the commodity-producing commodity that is bought and sold on the market. In this way, every concrete labour is stamped by the contradiction that leads back to the double character of commodity. But let us here take a few steps back.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="93" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#93">中</a>Without any logical gap that would separate the object of psychoanalysis from the object of the Marxist critique, both endeavours are joined by material implication:<span class="quote"><a id="94" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#94">中</a>Only my theory of language as structure of the unconscious can be said to be implied by Marxism, if, that is, you are not more demanding than the material implication. . . that is, that my theory of language is true whatever be the adequacy of Marxism, and that it is needed by it, whatever be the defect that it leaves Marxism with. So much for the theory of language implied logically by Marxism.</span><a id="95" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#95">中</a>A material implication is false only when truth implies something false. Then there are only a few options left: either Marx's theory is true, which implies Lacan's theory of language as something true; or Marx's theory is false, which nevertheless implies that Lacan's theory of language is true; or, finally, both Marx's and Lacan's theories are false, but even in this case the homology remains valid and the material implication conserves its truth value. In any case, the critique of political economy precedes and conditions psychoanalysis not merely historically but above all logically, epistemologically and politically.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="96" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#96">中</a>To say 'Marxism' naturally does not mean the same as to say 'Marx’. The quote contains more than it seems, for Lacan later alludes to the theory of language that Marxism implied historically. In the background stands Stalin's intervention into the Soviet linguistic debates, in which he negated the scientific status of Marrism, the theories of the Soviet linguist Nikolay Yakovlevich Marr, who defined language as a superstructure. Marr's theory implied that every major change in the base should lead to a major change in the superstructure. This would then mean that the Soviet revolution should have introduced a new language, or produced radical changes in the actually existing multiplicity of languages in the Soviet Union. Empirically this was naturally false and practically impossible. The development of language takes place independently from social revolutions, and Stalin's intervention into the debate consisted in declaring Marr's theory of language anti-Marxist, ending the debate with the order that ‘language is <span class="term">not</span> a superstructure’. Saussure claimed something similar in his lectures: the impossibility of a linguistic revolution comes from the fact that each subject participates in language individually. This individual participation prevents social revolutions from introducing major changes into the functioning of language. However, for Saussure, the same individual participation implies that language is subject to constant change. To repeat, language is not a state but a movement: it cannot be revolutionised, but there is nevertheless a permanent revolution, or better, a constant development and non-teleological becoming in language. This permanent revolution is located opposite individual participation, and does not mean that it is the subjects who consciously or intentionally change language.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="97" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#97">中</a>Lacan additionally specifies the characteristics of his theory of language: ‘The least you can accord me concerning my theory of language is, should it interest you, that it is materialist. The signifier is matter transcending itself into language.’ The critical value of this materialism is contained in the description of the signifier as matter transcending itself into language. An unusual matter, of course, since it violates the spontaneous understanding of materiality, but, then again, the modern scientific understanding of matter is consistently counterintuitive and counter-empirical. The signifier, and consequently language as such, appears as transcendence within immanence, <span class="term">torsion</span> within materiality. The causality of the signifier then does not consist in the simple scenario, where the signifier intervenes from some presupposed Outside but in the act of self-transcending, through which an autonomous system of differences emerges from materiality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="98" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#98">中</a>Lacan thereby rejects two seemingly opposite but nonetheless anti-materialist readings: conventionalism, for which language is a cultural product (human convention with the exclusive aim of communication), and neurolinguistics, which places language in the broader context of cerebral evolution(and for which language is no less an organ of communication). Neither a convention nor a biological product of evolution, since both reductions exclude the autonomy of the signifier, a contingent but no less real consequence that accompanies the emergence of language and without which language is unthinkable. This autonomy denaturalises the apparently natural or conventional tool of cerebral or cultural evolution. Language is therefore an internal exteriority, a foreign body in the biological body.  Its ‘atom', the signifier, becomes a cause by loosening its ties both to cerebral materiality and to communication. At this point, the relation between use-value and exchange-value re-enters the picture and Lacan's materialist definition of the signifier echoes Marx's description of commodity as a <span class="term">sinnlich übersinnliches Ding</span>,  sensual suprasensual thing, where the same act of transcendence, articulation of materiality (commodities) into (commodity) language, is at stake. And just as the transcendence of the signifier produces a metonymic subject and an ungraspable object of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, the transcendence of commodities transforms labour into labour-power and situates surplus-value as the privileged object-cause in the capitalist social link.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="99" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#99">中</a>The materialist definition of the signifier pursues the quarrel regarding alienation. An idealist would necessarily claim that the subject is constitutively unalienated and that alienation is secondary. At the same time, as soon as one starts from the primacy of the signifier, alienation turns out to be constitutive of the subject. The articulation of the signifier into an open system of differences can only produce a decentralised subjectivity, and Marx's critical move in the first chapter of <span class="term">Capital</span> consists in differentiating constituted alienation, fetishism, which still concerns the ‘cognitive' misperception of commodities, from constitutive alienation, production of capitalist subjectivity <span class="term">qua</span> labour-power. Labour-power designates the capitalist appropriation of the subject of the signifier, its transformation in accordance with the commodity form. In other words:<span class="quote"><a id="100" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#100">中</a>Value represents what of labour-power is contained in each object that carries value, but it can only represent it in commodity exchange, that is, for another value. But labour-power is simply the subject. It is Marx's name for the subject.</span><a id="101" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#101">中</a>According to Marx, his materialist predecessors, notably Feuerbach, failed to theorise the logical connection between alienation and structure. It is not materialist enough to simply reverse the relations between God and Man, or to proclaim that God is a projection of Man's desires, something that Freud formulated in his critique of religion. Marx founded materialism on the detachment of alienation from imaginary projection, associating it instead with structure and logics, the paradigmatic example here being the equivocity of commodity language and human language. The materialist orientation consequently substituted the reference to Man and to its transcendental essence with the reference to the subject, understood not as an autonomous consciousness but as a real consequence of the autonomous signifier. This is the essential point of Marx's <span class="term">Theses on Feuerbach</span>, which is actualised in <span class="term">Capital</span>:<span class="quote"><a id="102" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#102">中</a>The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism (that of Feuerbach included) is that the thing, reality, sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of the <span class="term">object or of contemplation</span>, but not as <span class="term">sensuous human activity</span>, <span class="term">practice</span>, not subjectively. Hence, in contradistinction to materialism, the <span class="term">active</span> side was developed abstractly by idealism - which, of course, does not know real, sensuous activity as such. . . Feuerbach resolves the religious essence into the <span class="term">human</span> essence. But the human essence is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. In its reality it is the ensemble of the social relations.</span><a id="103" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#103">中</a>Pre-critical theories of the subject continue to use the idealist vocabulary of cognition (contemplation, consciousness), keeping as their ultimate reference transcendental and centralised subjectivity, while the critique of political economy departs from the repressed flip side of this idealist subject, the alienated subject <span class="term">at work</span> in every discursive action. This is the <span class="term">logical</span> subject of politics. In order to achieve this, discourse, too, needs to be envisaged as more than mere <span class="term">organon</span>. The aim of Marx's analysis of labour therefore cannot be the simple liberation of living labour from blood-sucking capital but a rigorous determination of the actual subject of capitalism, labour-power, whose abolition would initiate a structural transformation of the entire mode of production and a transformation of the subject, since the logical subject of the autonomous system of differences would thereby be separated from the commodified form imposed by capitalism. Marx did envisage a liberation of the subject, not from alienation, as the humanist Marxists continue to claim, but from the false universalism of commodity form and from its abstract representation in the regime of values. Political economy, and the capitalist vision of politics that is grounded on its concepts, sees in the subject a mere commodity, hence an object, while enthroning the tendencies of capital and the private interests of the capitalist class as the privileged subject of politics.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="104" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#104">中</a>Milner proposed to call the materialist orientation that Lacan elaborated in his reference to Marx ‘discursive materialism’. The expression risks falsely suggesting that Lacan was atempting to construct some sort of postmodern materialism, a combination of vulgar materialism and thelinguistic performative. Yet it all comes down to how we understand Lacan's claim that discourse has consequences. If we interpret them within the framework of performative theory, then they remain within the symbolic, confirm the autonomy of the signifier and address merely the permanent modifications of linguistically constructed reality. Lacan's recurrent appeal to formal logic and mathematics goes beyond these narrow frameworks of performativism and exposes another kind of production in language from the mere proliferation of language games and metonymic meaning. The issue is most evidently at stake when it comes to the subject of representation (labour-power, the subject of the unconscious) and the object of production (surplus-value, surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span>): they are not simply performative effects of the capitalist discourse but real consequences of the structural causality in social reality and in the living body.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="105" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#105">中</a>Lacan often uses the example of the moon landing in his attempts to theorise discursive consequences. This event was not so much a ‘giant leap for mankind’ but rather an event in perfect accordance with what Foucault described as the ‘death of Man’. The true event is not the actual moon landing but the fact that it lies within the realm of discursive possibilities alone: 'scientific discourse was able to bring about the moon landing, where thought becomes witness to an eruption of the real, and with mathematics using nothing other than a linguistic apparatus.’ The moon landing is thus a discursively generated event, which does not make it in any way less real. Only that the materiality of the real demonstrated by the moon landing, as an event that has its mathematical foundations, goes much further than the reality of the moon landing, the empirical presence of Man on the moon. The appearance of the moon landing being an achievement of Man conceals the capacity of scientific discourse to produce an event by means of the linguistic apparatus, without Man as its central agent but not without a subject as its effect. Behind the ‘giant leap for Mankind' there lies the final erasure of the idealist human essence; the event once again demonstrated Man's actual status in the capitalist universe as a quantifiable subject (labour-power) mobilised by a successful cooperation between science and capitalism, meaning that Man was again confirmed in his status of  waste material rather than a sublime generic essence.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="106" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#106">中</a>When Lacan points out the discrepancy between the historical and the logical deployments of the Marxist theory of language, he indicates that Marxism failed to recognise that Marx's idea of commodity language and the inversion of the relation between use-value and exchange-value (exchange as an abstract but nonetheless productive action) already made it further than the Saussurean determination of the double character of linguistic signs. Lacan's correction of structural linguistics - the isolation of the signifier from the sign and the introduction of the subject - provides the materialist theory of language indicated in Marx's critique (in the earlier quoted excerpts Lacan writes twice: '<span class="term">my</span> theory of language’ ). In turn, Marx’s theory makes the same correction in relation to the political-economic labour theory of value. A critical and materialist theory of value can be elaborated only under the condition that the abstract political-economic subject of private interest is replaced with the alienated subject <span class="term">qua</span> labour-power. In this case as well, Marxism regressed back to the idealist framework that Marx criticised in his <span class="term">Theses on Feuerbach</span>. The Marxist variant of idealist subjectivity is proletarian class-consciousness, yet another version of the transcendental subject of History. A significant part of Marxism (one but surely not the only exception being Althusser's theoretical anti-humanism) inverted Marx's logic, which begins with the autonomy of value in order to arrive at the production of decentralised subjectivity. That <span class="term">Capital</span> is about structural and not empirical or cognitive reality is made explicit in the very preface, where Marx writes:<span class="quote"><a id="107" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#107">中</a>To prevent possible misunderstanding, let me say this. I do not by any means depict the capitalist and the landowner in rosy colours. But individuals are dealt with here only in so far as they are the personifications of economic categories, the bearers of particular class-relations and interests. My standpoint, from which the development of the economic formation of society is viewed as a process of natural history, can less than any other make the individual responsible for relations whose creature he remains, socially speaking, however much he may subjectively raise himself above them.</span><a id="108" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#108">中</a>Again, Marx does not aim to ground politics on the cognition of the capitalist relations of production, whose efficiency is independent from consciousness, but on a materialist theory of the subject, which is supposed to give ground to an actual universalism while also demonstrating the root at which the false universality of commodity form grabs each individual and society as a whole. The rejection of the primacy of cognition is further expressed in the following well-known reversal, where Marx's implicit understanding of the signifier already surpasses Saussure:<span class="quote"><a id="109" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#109">中</a>Men do not therefore bring the products of their labour into relation with each other as values because they see these objects merely as the material integuments of homogeneous human labour. The reverse is true: by equating their different products to each other in exchange as values, they equate their different kinds of labour as human labour. They do not know it, nevertheless they do it. Value, therefore, does not have its description branded on its forehead; it rather transforms every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, men try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of their own social product: for the characteristic which objects of utility have of being values is as much men's social product as is their language.</span><a id="110" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#110">中</a>Because there is exchange, different kinds of labour are condensed into an abstraction, which is nonetheless material. The system of differences transforms labour, which does not leave the subject unaffected. Hence the question is not in deciphering the hidden meaning of social hieroglyphs but in situating the subject they signal in their autonomy. For whether in civilisation or in the desert, a hieroglyph always implies another hieroglyph and the subject of the relation independently of consciousness. A hieroglyph is always-already social because of this implication and not because of its use by concrete and conscious individuals.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="111" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#111">中</a>When it comes to social hieroglyphs, fetishism is already an attempt at their interpretation, which leaves the structure of the commodity universe unknown and the logic of production mystified. By ascribing to commodities, money and capital, the value of having a positive and intrinsic quality, fetishisation comes rather close to hermeneutic interpretation (just as for Plato and Heidegger being was an immanent feature oflanguage and not its effect). On the contrary, a materialist interpretation highlights the autonomy of structural relations and traces the fetishist interpretation back to the equivocity of commodity form. Slavoj Zizek has suggested on several occasions that ‘they do not know it, nevertheless they do it' should be supplemented with ‘they know it, nevertheless they do it’. The efficiency of structural relations being immune to consciousness, Marx's critical method cannot envisage an overall abolition of fetishisation but the detachment of politics from the reign of economic abstractions, which has been intensified by decades of neoliberalism. The liberation of politics consequently means the same as the abolition of the rootedness of social links in the commodity form as their unique formal envelope.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="112" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#112">中</a>The statement ‘they do not know it, nevertheless they do it' seems to contain the division between conscious knowledge and unconscious action, but the actual and more fundamental division exists in the regime of knowledge: between reflected knowledge, on the one hand, and unknown knowledge, contained in both thinking and action, on the other. Marx is here even more Freud's predecessor, showing that the necessary precondition for abolishing the political reign of capitalist abstractions resides in a systematic reintroduction of negativity into politics. Class struggle is not the sole politically charged signifier - the unconscious is one as well. To demonstrate the logical inscription of the unconscious into politics was the central effort of  Lacan's homology.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="113" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#113">中</a>When introducing the homology between both surpluses, Lacan expresses his regret that he did not introduce Marx earlier into ‘the field in which he is, after all, entirelyat home', or on another occasion, '<span class="term">Mehrwert</span> is <span class="term">Marxlust</span>, Marx's surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span>’. As evident as this affinity may appear in the late 1960s, this introduction could not have happened before the invention of object <span class="term">a</span>. In 1968, the object <span class="term">a</span> is already the central Lacanian concept, and Marx can now become the privileged reference, which helps to uncover ‘the place where we need to situate the essential function of object <span class="term">a'</span>: the homology immediately extends into homotopy.  The logical identity of both surpluses strives to situate the specific mode of existence of the unconscious in the social link while also accounting for the unconscious effects of the capitalist discourse; the capitalist colonisation of the mental apparatus. In homology there is no place for the opposition of the subjective and the social. Freud already tried to place psychoanalysis on this border, and Lacan's notion of discourse pursues this direction, describing both the structure articulated in individual speech and the structure of the social link. But Lacan differs from Freud in one important respect. While Freud's theories amounted to the myth of the primordial father, the originary subject of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, the fundamental Lacanian lesson is that there is no such thing as a subject of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, just as for Marx there is no subject of surplus-value, unless one fetishises the <span class="term">appearance</span> of capital as the vital subject of valorisation, as is the case in the developed forms of capitalist abstractions such as financial capital (but also on the more 'immediate' level of commodities and money).</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="114" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#114">中</a>Lacan introduces his reading of Marx by recalling the most evident feature of his critical break with political economy:<span class="quote"><a id="115" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#115">中</a>Marx departs from the function of the market. His novelty is the place where he situates labour. It is not that labour is something new but that it is bought, that there is a market of labour. This is what allows Marx to demonstrate what is inaugural in his discourse and what is called surplus-value.</span><a id="116" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#116">中</a>The departure is not the market of political economists, where all commodities and values seem to occupy the same level and are abolished in equivalence, but a 'market of labour’, where labour-power is the negative metonymic constant that value represents in every commodity and that exposes the paradoxes of commodity form and of the market as such. To repeat, the main inconsistency resides in the double character of commodity, which grounds the difference between commodities and commodity-producing commodity, and more generally the gap between representation of labour-power in terms of exchange-value and production of surplus-value in the consumption of labour-power. The political economists see the market as an ‘immense collection of commodities' (Marx), a closed system, whose dynamic does not necessarily contradict the  immanent tendencies to self-regulation and homeostasis. The market appears homogeneous and structured on stable and predictable relations, similarly as in the previously discussed Saussurean analogy, in which there are only values that relate to commodities in an arbitrary but nevertheless stable and adequate way. In the sharpest possible contrast to this idyllic scenario, the consequent interpretation of the market as being first and foremost a market of labour exposes that this political-economic Other is traversed by contradictions and is therefore inconsistent. At the very heart of the capitalist transformation of labour stands the strikingly banal and yet wide-reaching fact that labour is bought and sold on the market, where it appears as a commodity among others. To say that Marx's novelty lies in the correct situation of labour - and not simply in the labour theory of value, to which his critical interventions could mistakenly be reduced - again argues that a materialist science of value is not possible without a theory of the subject that the political-economic labour theory failed to articulate.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="117" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#117">中</a>Lacan grounds the homology between surplus-value and surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> on a reformulation of  his definition of the signifier: 'the signifier is what represents a subject to another signifier’. Saying that Marx's version would be ‘value represents labour-power for another value' would not be entirely correct because it would bypass the double character of the commodity form. Lacan therefore draws a different conclusion. His old definition is ‘copied from the fact that, in what Marx deciphered, namely the economic reality, the subject of exchange-value is represented next to the use-value’. The extension of the double character of commodity to the logic of the signifier additionally exposes the ambiguous status of use-value, whose abstract face becomes apparent in the consumption of labour-power. Its usefulness indeed consists in the production of other commodities, but from the perspective of capital its consumption aims at the extraction of surplus-value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="118" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#118">中</a>The gap between representation and production cannot be localised because it is everywhere and nowhere in the labour process. No quantification can draw a limit, where the production of use-values ceases and the production of surplus-value begins, and correspondingly, where labour is paid and where unpaid surplus labour begins. The problem clearly does not lie in the fact that the value of labour-power would be inadequate or that a more accurate representation of labour-power should be sought, but that labour-power is already produced as structurally inadequate and nonidentical. Consequently, the articulation of representation with production, exchange-value with use-value, presupposes a different topology from the univocal division of inside and outside. The space, in which representation and production intertwine, is simultaneously continuous and discontinuous, displaying the main feature of the Möbius strip. This is the homotopy that the homology leads to.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="119" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#119">中</a>The crucial factor that complicates the topological but also the temporal relations is the tendency of capital towards self-valorisation, which makes the production of use-values indistinguishable from the production of surplus-value. Marx writes:<span class="quote"><a id="120" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#120">中</a>The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its daily value. The use-value of the labour-power belongs to him throughout one working day. He has thus acquired the right to make the worker work for him during one day. But, what is a working day? At all events, it is less than a natural day. How much less? The capitalist has his own views of this point of no return, the necessary limit of the working day. As a capitalist, he is only capital personified. His soul is the soul of capital. But capital has one sole driving force, the drive to valorize itself, to create surplus-value, to make its constant part, the means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus labour.</span><a id="121" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#121">中</a>The structural tendencies and imperatives of capital push the entirety of production towards purposelessness and compulsive automatism. Through this <span class="term">automaton</span> the main feature of <span class="term">jouissance</span> emerges in the capitalist organisation of labour, the fact that the surplus-object ‘serves no purpose’. It does not satisfy another tendency except the drive for self-valorisation, so that the ultimate aim of labour consists in producing more labour.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="122" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#122">中</a>Lacan's translation of the signifer into economic reality recapitulates the contradiction of the two circulations that Marx formalises in the introductory chapters of <span class="term">Capital</span>. The structure of the capitalist mode of production is internally doubled on the circulation ‘commodity - money - commodity' (C-M-C) and ‘money-commodity-money' (M-C-M). This internal doubling is not without the appearance that we are dealing with two different and independent circulations, which can be read historically or logically, and Marx seems to propose both readings. According to the historic one, the (C-M-C) circulation (exchange, selling and buying)would be the oldest form that historically and logically precedes capitalism and that, more importantly, does not contain the perversion that grounds the capitalist mode of production, whose aim is exclusively the production of surplus-value, the constant growth of profit and absolute autonomy of capital (M-M'), the formula of fictitious capital that abolishes the mediation of production through commodity labour-power. The genesis of capitalism thus implies a structural shift that is both historical and logical, and the difference between the first and the second circulation seems to recapitulate the historical passage from feudalism to capitalism. Marx formalises this development in the circulation(M-C-M), which he immediately corrects into (M-C -M'), where (M'=M+△M, increase of value)and thereby finally situates surplus-value in the social link. Lacan's definition of the signifier can be situated in both circulations but has entirely different consequences in the virtually infinite circulation (M-C-M').</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="123" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#123">中</a>The historical reading of the first circulation inevitably falls into the trap of its idealisation: the nostalgia for those good old days when commodity exchange was still immediate and when social reality was not corrupted by the merciless drive for profit. Placing (C-M-C) before the circulation of capital thus produces a fantasy of economic exchange as the paradigmatic case of social relation and the illusion that this exchange was once homeostatic and regulated but was thrown out of joint by the instabilities of capital; an illusion of the past, in which money still fulfilled its social function, its use-value, which consisted in supporting economic exchange and thereby the social relation. Marx certainly does not promote this oversimplifying nostalgic vision, since he recalls that the paradoxes of the general equivalent already troubled Aristotle. At the same time, both circulations address the inner inconsistency of the capitalist social link. Their logical reading shows that Marx in fact analyses the gap between appearance and structure. (C-M-C) is not more immediate, not an authentic exchange that is later corrupted by profit-oriented (M-C-M') but an <span class="term">inner fiction</span> of the circulation (M-C-M'). Of course, we cannot simply claim that in capitalism commodity exchange is inoperative. It is operative precisely as far as it masks the circulation of capital and neutralises its immediate obscenity and exploitative tendencies. According to the logical reading, the first circulation, selling and buying, concerns the worker, and the second, apparently symmetrical one, buying and selling, the capitalist. Of course, the whole critical point of Marx's formalisation is to prove that both circulations are asymmetrical: that what the worker is selling is not the same thing as what the capitalist is buying, or put differently, that the value for which the labour is sold is not the same as the value for which it is bought. When the capitalist buys labour-power he gets in one and the same package surplus-value:<span class="quote"><a id="124" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#124">中</a>We pay labour with money, because we are on the market. We pay it according to its true price, as it is defined on the market by the function of exchange-value. But there is unpaid value in what appears as the fruit of labour, because the true price of this fruit is in its use-value. This unpaid labour, which is nevertheless paid in a just way in relation to the consistency of the market in the functioning of capitalist discourse, is surplus-value.</span><a id="125" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#125">中</a>The apparently banal remark that we pay labour with money demonstrates its point if we remember the most basic Marxian lesson regarding money. Since we are dealing with two different circulations, money, just like any other commodity, appears in its double character: once as use-value, a material support of exchange, a concrete embodiment of that sameness that is expressed by all exchanged commodities, and once as capital, the embodiment of the autonomy of exchange-value and ofthe surplus-object. Money finally reveals the fantasmatic status of use-value, which is nevertheless necessary for the functioning of the capitalist machinery. Money has no use-value except that it supports exchange and embodies the autonomy of value. For this reason it becomes the fetishist object <span class="term">par excellence</span>. But social inequality again reveals the immanent doubling of exchange, since the labourer only deals with money as means of exchange, that is, labourpower can only be represented through exchange-value, and according to the law of exchange the labourer receives a 'just' payment. The capitalist, however, deals with money as capital, and from this perspective the use-value of labour-power does not consist in producing commodities but in producing more value. For this reason, the capitalist as the personification of capital and as a social administrator of its ‘private interest' tends to extend the working day and to reduce the time needed for the production of use-values. The labourer gets paid 'justly, yet the truth of labour is not in the presumed adequacy of representation but in the structural gap that both separates and links it to production.</p>
	<h2 id="part_4"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">T</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">HE LOGIC OF SURPLUS AND LOSS</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="126" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#126">中</a>The gap between representation and production certainly reflects an inner break in the social link, but it also has a structuring function that amounts to the well-known result that drives capitalist social relations: ‘It is in this gap that what is called surplus-value is produced and falls. Non-identical to itself, the subject no longer enjoys. Something called surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> is lost’. The double production of the subject of loss and the surplus-object is accompanied by the appearance that the object originally belonged to the subject and was only lost at a later stage. This appearance is the negative correlate to the fetishisation of capitalist abstractions and motivates a misinterpretation of the worker's position. The psychoanalytic supplement to the Marxist critique of fetishism is contained in the very homophony of <span class="term">plus</span> in <span class="term">plus-de-jouir</span>, which means both ‘more <span class="term">jouissance</span>’ and ‘no more <span class="term">jouissance</span>’. The formulation resumes the central Freudian thesis that <span class="term">jouissance</span> knows no right measure and that its production entirely undermines the homeostatic model, on which, for instance, Aristotelian ethics as well as economic liberalism built their economic and political theories. Behind the subjective pursuit of egoistic private interest, the multiplicity of small human narcissisms, from which, for Adam Smith and other liberal economists, somewhat miraculously grows a stable social relation, there is a structural loss, which in advance corrupts the capitalist pursuit of happiness and its fantastic success stories. In opposition to political economy, Freud grounded his metapsychological account of libidinal economy on the rejection of the homeostatic model. The homeostatic vision of the mental apparatus is definitively abolished in <span class="term">Beyond the Pleasure Principle</span> (1920), where the notion of the death drive, the emblem of the constitutive instabilities of libidinal economy, enters the picture.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="127" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#127">中</a>The two aspects of fetishism are addressed in Lacan's formula of fantasy ($◇a), according to which the fetishisation varies depending on whether the given conditions are observed from the position of the subject or of the object. In the first case, the structurally generated appearance suggests that the subject and the object form two compatible halves that could be fused together in a non-problematic totality. In the second, the subject of valorisation appears to be capital itself, as the fetishisation of capitalist abstractions suggests. In any case, the subject's non-identity is perceived as secondary and as something that could be abolished simply by ‘correcting’ the structural relations that brought the subject into existence. The standard social-democratic scenario moves in this direction: including the workers in a more just distribution of profit, collective ownership of the means of production, regulating financial speculation and bringing the economy down to the solid ground of the real sector. More radical political experiments were equally unsuccessful in abolishing alienation: ‘It's not because one nationalises the means of production at the level of socialism in one country that one has thereby done away with surplus-value, if one doesn't know what it is’. Nationalisation does not produce the necessary global structural change, which would abolish the market of labour and thereby the structural contradiction that transforms the subject into a commodity-producing commodity. The non-relation between labour-power and surplus-value remains operative, and nationalisation in the last instance evolves into a form of state capitalism. Marx, however, did not claim that the appropriation of surplus-value would abolish the capitalist forms of alienation and fetishisation. This would suggest that the abolition of capitalists, these social fanatics of the valorisation of value and personifications of capital, would already solve the problem. Marx's point is rather that capitalism <span class="term">can</span> exist without capitalists because the capitalist drive to self-valorisation is structural, systemic and autonomous-but there cannot be any capitalism without the proletariat.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="128" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#128">中</a>The critical and materialist signification of alienation departs from the autonomy of the signifier and leads to the conclusion that alienation is structure. No identity or <span class="term">jouissance</span> precedes non-identity and loss, and, consequently, no subjective wholeness is abolished and no immediate access to <span class="term">jouissance</span> is made impossible by the intervention of the signifier. Such a position would indeed place psychoanalysis in the symmetrical understanding of alienation, which echoes in Freud’s earlier accounts of the relation between sexuality and culture and eventually in Freudo-Marxism. Identity assumes the same status as the idealist notion of human essence that Marx criticised in his predecessors. The equivalence between alienation and structure, by contrast, leaves no doubt that the flip side of the production of surplus is the reproduction of lack - the true ‘matter’ by which the subject is constituted.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="129" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#129">中</a>The equivocity of the <span class="term">plus</span> in surplus-value and surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> allows Lacan to conclude that the discursive structure of capitalism imposes the renunciation of <span class="term">jouissance</span> rather than its prohibition. This renunciation is what makes of the capitalist a modern master. The point is not necessarily self-evident, notably if we recall the conclusion of Marx’s critique of primitive accumulation, the founding myth of political economy, according to which the capitalist historically accumulated the first wealth through saving, while the proletarian enjoyed beyond his limits, until he was left solely with his labour-power. In this process, his entire existence was reduced to a labour without qualities, which stained his being with having. Marx mobilises this main feature of alienation to his own advantage, under the abolition of the political-economic myth of primitive accumulation. In the capitalist universe, commodity is not simply yet another private property but the privileged form of being. The ontological question of being is thus necessarily preceded and conditioned by the pre-ontological question of having, whereby the asymmetry between the subjective lack and objective surplus highlights the modern coordinates of the ontological problematic. This effort implicitly traverses Marx’s critique of materialism in his <span class="term">Theses on Feuerbach</span> and determines its future orientation. There is no critique of political economy without an implicit materialist ontology.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="130" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#130">中</a>But let us return here to the link between labour and the renunciation of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. According to Lacan, this is not the actual novelty of Marx and Freud’s concept of labour. Their critical contribution is in explaining this renunciation as something that is structurally imposed on the subject by the relations of domination:<span class="quote"><a id="131" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#131">中</a>From the very start, contrary to what Hegel claims or seems to claim, it is precisely this renunciation that constitutes the master, who knows very well how to make it the principle of his power. What is new here is that there is a discourse that articulates this renunciation and makes it appear within something that I will call the function of surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span>.</span><a id="132" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#132">中</a>The correction of the political-economic idea of renunciation becomes more evident here. The master does not renounce some substantial <span class="term">jouissance</span> but instead structurally imposes the renunciation on every subject. The equivocity of <span class="term">plus</span> in surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> again turns out to be crucial. Surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> is not some <span class="term">jouissance</span> that would reach beyond another <span class="term">jouissance</span>, in the sense that there would be a certain quantity of <span class="term">jouissance</span> to which something more is added. The actual correlate to the surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span>, produced by the same discursive cut, is the lack of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. The renunciation of <span class="term">jouissance</span> therefore contains more than the battle for pure prestige through which Hegel seems to approach the master-slave dialectic. The capitalist relations of domination build on this double face of the surplus. Production goes hand in hand with renunciation, the ‘more’ with the ‘no more’. The double structural imperative-production of surplus and production of lack through renunciation - initiates a negative spiral, in which no produced surplus is surplus enough. The capitalist master constantly demands more, the famous <span class="term">encore</span> that Lacan placed in the title of one of his seminars. Marx in his turn exemplified this imperative in the so-called abstinence theory of the capitalist:<span class="quote"><a id="133" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#133">中</a>But, in so far as he is capital personified, his motivating force is not the acquisition of enjoyment of use-values, but the acquisition and augmentation of exchange-values. He is fanatically intent on the valorisation of value; consequently he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for production’s sake . . . Only as personification of capital is the capitalist respectable. As such, he shares with the miser an absolute drive toward self-enrichment [<span class="term">Bereicherungstrieb</span>]. But what appears in the miser as the mania of an individual is in the capitalist the effect of a social mechanism in which he is merely a cog.</span><a id="134" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#134">中</a>The master’s renunciation of <span class="term">jouissance</span> lies in the difference between the miser and the capitalist, which entails several traps, the main one being that the miser can appear, in comparison to the capitalist, as a subject supposed to enjoy. The quoted passage contains the best description of the difference between enjoyment in the vulgar sense and what Lacan’s concept of <span class="term">jouissance</span> aims at. In everyday understanding, enjoyment is linked to consumption, which still presupposes positive qualities and concrete consumption (use-value). The miser, by contrast, displays, not some other or perverse enjoyment but that which should be properly called <span class="term">jouissance</span>. Instead of wasting his wealth on private consumption, he accumulates, jealously protecting his treasure from the rest of the world, first and foremost from his own temptation to waste it. In his abstinence, the miser does much more than simply renounce some immediate enjoyment in consumption. His drive for enrichment can reach satisfaction only in detaching the privileged embodiments of wealth (gold and money) from their social circulation. His entire persona thereby becomes a hostage of the object.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="135" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#135">中</a>Two things are worth noticing in the difference between the miser and the capitalist, which also reveal why the capitalist is a figure of the master, while the miser is merely its comical caricature. Despite being a consequence of the social mechanism, the miser’s drive is still actualised in the form of his subjective fixation and obsession, while in the capitalist the same drive is <span class="term">the</span> structuring element of the social link, a systemic imperative that is interested solely in values and <span class="term">jouissance</span> in the production process. The capitalist actualises the truth of the miser and can become what the miser cannot: the personification of the systemic imperative of accumulation of wealth, now transformed into capital, that is, into an externalised social link that no longer includes merely accumulation but also production, circulation and individual consumption. The capitalist stands for a <span class="term">globalisation of the drive</span>, its sole function is to support and preserve the social implementation of the fanaticism of the demand, to which the drive for enrichment is reducible: the constant expansion of value, the imperative of growth, accompanied by the permanent revolution of the means of production and the forcing of populations into precarity. All this demands renunciation, indebting and production of lack, which finally makes of the capitalist an <span class="term">inversion</span> of the miser, the social transformation of the ‘spirit of the miser’. The miser so to speak renounced social relations for the sake of the illusion that the immediate access to <span class="term">jouissance</span> is possible only in the form of treasure. For this reason, usury has been morally condemned throughout history, and the miser fetishised as an obscene subject of <span class="term">jouissance</span>. The miser illustrates Marx's remark that ‘capitalism is already essentially abolished once we assume that it is enjoyment that is the driving motive and not enrichment itself’. To rephrase, the miser does not entirely follow through on his attempt to detach the treasure from personal enjoyment. He detaches it from everyone, including himself, but he does not make the <span class="term">jouissance</span> produced through this very detachment appear as the <span class="term">jouissance</span> of the system. For the miser, <span class="term">jouissance</span> assumes the finite and empirical form, while for the capitalist treasure is the more endless the more it is abstract: from gold to paper money, from paper money to fictitious capital, electronic money and so on. The miser counts objects: his treasure is embodied. The capitalist merely counts: his treasure is the number. Consequently, fetishisation is displaced from concrete materiality to the ghostly materiality of financial abstractions. The more surplus is turned into an abstraction, the more it pertains to the system, and the less the systemic obscenity is visible. The enrichment itself becomes a socially acceptable and admirable abstraction.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="136" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#136">中</a>But this enrichment contains its inevitable flip side, the production of surplus populations, the true signification of ‘human capital’. The equivocity between ‘more’ and ‘no more’ envisages this negative social production: ‘Surplus-value is the cause of desire, which a certain economy has made its principle: that of the extensive and therefore insatiable production of a lack-of-<span class="term">jouissance</span>’; or another variation: 'I think I have sufficiently announced from the beginning of this year that surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> is something other than <span class="term">jouissance</span>. Surplus-<span class="term">jouissance</span> responds, not to <span class="term">jouissance</span>, but to the loss of <span class="term">jouissance</span>'. The epistemological tool that provides an insight into the structure of the libidinal and the social economy is the second law of thermodynamics, which explains the flow of energy from regions with higher temperature to regions with lower temperature, thereby introducing the notion of entropy. The notion already supported Marx's analysis of the extraction of surplus-value from the consumption of labour-power. The same asymmetry is reflected in the broader social context: the accumulation of wealth accompanied by the accumulation of misery, the revolution of the means of production combined with the production of a surplus population. The capitalist social link is structured like entropy.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="137" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#137">中</a>Lacan approaches energetics through the autonomy of the signifier and envisages in entropy a real structure, which provides privileged insight into social contradictions. In this epistemological reading, energy is desubstantialised and ontologically problematised:<span class="quote"><a id="138" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#138">中</a>Energy is not a substance, which, for example, improves or goes sour with age; it’s a numerical constant that a physicist has to find in his calculations, so as to be able to work ... Without this constant, which is merely a combination of calculations ... you have no more physics. . . the condition that the system be mathematically closed prevails even over the assumption that it is physically isolated.</span><a id="139" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#139">中</a>Lacan in fact criticises Freud’s energetic theory of the unconscious, which, under the pretention to provide positive scientific foundations for psychoanalytic concepts, ended up in a substantialist reading both of the objects of natural sciences and of his own inquiries. In Freud's mature work, the unconscious and the drive indeed obtained a problematic status, beginning to designate positive ontological entities that Freud no longer strived to explain through discursive causality but rather through the speculative phylogenetic development stretching from protozoa to the human libido. When Lacan took Freud’s early insight on the linguistic nature of the unconscious seriously, he directed psychoanalysis away from positivism and biologism. In the above quote, Lacan extends the same critical move to the natural sciences, claiming that their discoveries do not simply relate to an unproblematic empirical reality but instead question the solidity and univocity of its ontological foundations. Such an interrogation is possible only under the condition that the relation between discourse and the real is no longer subsumed under the ideal of <span class="term">adaequatio</span>, in which discourse, as Lacan occasionally remarks, is considered to have no consequences whatsoever. The Lacanian distinction between reality and the real, moreover, results from this extension of the structural reading of psychoanalysis to the entire scientific modernity. In short, the difference between the two orders consists in the fact that reality designates merely the way the real appears to the human observer -reality as a ‘grimace of the real’ - while the real, to put it paradoxically, stands for the way the real ‘appears’ to the autonomy of the discourse, e.g., to mathematical language:<span class="quote"><a id="140" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#140">中</a>When the signifier is introduced as an apparatus of <span class="term">jouissance</span>, we should thus not be surprised to see something related to entropy appear, since entropy is defined precisely once one has started to lay this apparatus of signifiers over the physical world.</span><a id="141" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#141">中</a>We can hear the echo of Alexandre Koyré’s thesis that modern science no longer explains the empirical world, in opposition to the Aristotelian and medieval science, which uses mathematics in order to ‘save the appearances’. Of course, the real cannot be the same in physics, psychoanalysis or critique of political economy, which deal with different orders of reality (physical, subjective, social) but also with different versions of discursive autonomy (formal language, the signifier, value). What does unite them, however, is the logical procedure, according to which all these discourses encounter and formalise the respective <span class="term">structure of the real</span>,in which objects like energy, <span class="term">jouissance</span> and surplus-value can be theorised. Another way to situate the difference between reality and the real would be that in reality the process of montage or construction is at stake, while the real demands decomposition and dissolution of appearances. In scientific discourse, the real is what remains for formalisation to grasp once this decomposition has reached its bottom line, or as Lacan puts it:<span class="quote"><a id="142" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#142">中</a>The real is what makes a hole in this articulated semblant that is the scientific discourse. Scientific discourse progresses, without being preoccupied with the question of whether it is a semblant or not. What is important is that its network, its web, its <span class="term">lattice</span>, as we say, makes the right holes appear in the right place. Its sole reference is the impossible, to which its deductions amount. This impossible is the real. We can reach something real in physics precisely through the discursive apparatus, as far as it, in its rigour, encounters the limits of its consistency.</span><a id="143" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#143">中</a>In this respect natural sciences contain a much more dialectical-speculative and anti-empiricist kernel than the positivist epistemologies are willing to acknowledge. The encounter of the real takes place when the discourse faces its own inconsistency and not some absolute and substantial empirical Outside. The actual site of the encounter is not in experimentation but in formalisation and in the deadlocks that accompany the scientific discourse on the path that leads to the resolution, abolition or reduction of an epistemological deadlock. Verification of a hypothesis is already a step towards normalisation, a moment of stabilisation and reconstruction of reality. As Lacan often repeats, reality is what functions-and the functioning is what the ‘master’ constantly demands - whereas the real is what does not function, something that violates or distorts the automatic repetition and flawless circulation of a discursive mechanism. This is one of the main lessons that can be drawn from Koyrés interpretation of modern scientific revolution. The scientific encounter of the real therefore rejects the all too simple distinction between extra-linguistic and intra-linguistic reality. It takes place within discourse but throws it out of joint. Pushing discursivity to its limits, where the real is inscribed into the symbolic, science exposes a dimension of language that is freed of its communicative, meaningful and pragmatic function. In the same move, it rejects the substantialisation of the real and the transcendentalism of the symbolic, showing that the real is neither an unattainable ‘thing in itself’ nor an unproblematic exteriority; and language is no prison without walls, from which it is impossible to escape.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="144" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#144">中</a>Psychoanalysis and the critique of political economy are conditioned by this epistemological paradigm. The unconscious and class struggle, two real cracks in the social and the subjective reality, can be encountered by pushing the discursive consistency to its limits. Lacan’s comments thus combine the epistemological and the political problematic that correlates the scientific discovery of labour-power to the economic mathematisation of surplus-value, which abolished its premodern mystification. In the background we can perceive an outline of another homology, this time between science and capitalism. It may appear that Lacan thereby came close to Heidegger’s pessimistic vision, in which science is reduced to its instrumental and technological ‘essence’. This reduction, culminating in the controversial Heideggerian remark that science does not think, bears the mark of fetishisation. According to Heidegger, the realisation of modern science in technology accomplishes the historical process of the oblivion of being that determined Western metaphysics. With the globalisation of abstract calculation, the paradigmatic case of non-thinking, which unites the scientific and the economic thoughtless and therefore empty reason, the oblivion of being itself fell into oblivion: this is what Heidegger calls ‘<span class="term">the</span> danger’. In this dark scenario, only poetic thinking can render the authentic, originary sense of being and overcome the domination of scientific calculus and capitalist abstractions. The negative fetishisation of science is supplemented by the positive fetishisation of poetry, which is for Heidegger <span class="term">the</span> language of being.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="145" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#145">中</a>Yet Lacan never adopted Heidegger’s antagonistic reading of mathematical language versus poetic language. What he did seem to endorse is the idea that modern science contains an ontological scandal that does not stand so much for the oblivion of the question of being but instead reveals an unbridgeable gap between thinking and being, as well as between being and the real. Formalisation is an exemplification of a concurrent ‘sameness’ concerning thinking and the real, but the price for this sameness is the separation of thinking from being and consequently the decentralisation, or alienation, of thinking. The radicalisation of the structuralist project replaces the question of being with the examination of the ways in which the autonomy of the signifier enables thinking to encounter within being <span class="term">more than being</span>, something that is neither being nor non-being but ‘non-realised’. It is no coincidence that Heidegger never thematised the philosophical importance of Freud’s discovery of the unconscious, this paradigmatic example of a paradoxical entity that neither is nor is not but insists in the state of repression, as the persistence of the non-realised in thinking. It is also not surprising that Lacan found in mathematics the privileged correspondent in rethinking the ontological status of the unconscious and other real consequences linked to science, thereby making an anti-Heideggerian move <span class="term">par excellence</span>.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="146" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#146">中</a>The epistemological and political orientation of the return to Freud thus displaces the accent from ‘Does science think’ to ‘What form of thinking does modern science ground in?’ For Lacan there is no dilemma; science thinks and its thinking challenges the classical philosophical ideal of the thinking of thinking, as well as the foundation of ontology on the postulate of the sameness of thinking and being:<span class="quote"><a id="147" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#147">中</a>As a language that fits the scientific discourse best mathematics is science without consciousness, the one that our good old Rabelais promised us and in face of which a philosopher can only remain stupid: gay science is thrilled when it observes in this the ruin of the soul. But of course neurosis survived it.</span><a id="148" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#148">中</a>The modern foundation of science on the autonomous signifier abolished the hypothesis of a centralised thinking that philosophy nevertheless renewed through the subject of cognition. As science without consciousness (without the subject of cognition as its central instance) mathematics detaches language from communication, the real from being, and thinking from itself. Marx and Freud repeat these moves in their analyses of the commodity form and unconscious formations, two concrete examples of decentralised thought. The abolition of the soul was the necessary epistemological condition for Freud’s aetiology of neuroses, a theory of causality that departs from the signifier as the material cause of <span class="term">jouissance</span> and a materialisation of the gap between thinking and being. Yet the subversive potential of mathematical language encounters its limit precisely in the commodity form, which builds on the same discursive autonomy and through which the capitalist fetishisation of economic abstractions reintroduces the hypothesis of the soul through the backdoor: the commodity soul and the spectrality of capital that vitalises the modern universe (the global market) becomes the general formal envelope of thinking, thereby necessarily channelling all the subversive potential of modern science into the permanent revolution of the means of production.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="149" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#149">中</a>At a later point, Lacan distinguished between thinking science and objectified science, which immediately addresses its ambiguity in the capitalist framework. The distinction does not necessarily suggest that we are dealing with a good revolutionary science, which unmasks the illusory character of traditional and modern worldviews, as Freud claimed, and the bad commodified science that supports the perpetuation and reproduction of capitalism. Rather, the distinction insists that the decentralisation of thinking, the revolutionary dimension of science without consciousness, is inseparable from the historic genesis of a specific form of this decentralisation: the commodity form. But it does situate science as one of the central terrains of struggle against capitalism. Together with the epistemological conditions of the commodity form and the fetishisation tied to capitalist abstractions, modern science provides the necessary conditions for the invention of critical and conflictual sciences such as psychoanalysis and the critique of political economy.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="150" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#150">中</a>In his analysis of the capitalist transformation of labour, Marx already encountered an essential scientific operation that Lacan named <span class="term">réduction de materiel</span>, material reduction. The condensation of labour into labour-power, which stands at the origin of the absolutisation of the market, is a productive abstraction that seemingly reduces different forms of concrete labour but in fact amounts to a new materiality of the subject. Material reduction is at work in every placement of the network of signifiers over a given reality, be it physical, social or subjective, but it also concerns the entire history of logic, in which the autonomy and the materiality of the signifier is progressively isolated:<span class="quote"><a id="151" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#151">中</a>The material reduction means that logic begins at a precise date in history when someone who had an understanding of this substituted certain elements of language that function in their natural syntax with a simple letter. And this is what inaugurates logic.</span><a id="152" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#152">中</a>Introducing A and B instead of saying ‘if this then that’ does not seem to have any dramatic consequences. However, Aristotelian logic is merely the first step towards the autonomy of the signifier, the subordination of the signifier to the letter, which is still consistent with Aristotle’s ‘organonic’ notion of language. The actual subversion takes place in modernity, when the new foundation of science brings about a different result, the mathematisation of the signifier, uncovering the distinction between reality and the real. A concrete case of this development is again offered by the historical transformation of the market, which, besides the condensation of labour, consisted in the quantification of surplus-object:<span class="quote"><a id="153" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#153">中</a>Something changed in the master’s discourse at a certain point in history. We are not going to break our backs finding out if it was because of Luther, or Calvin, or some unknown traffic of ships around Genoa, or in the Mediterranean Sea, or anywhere else, for the important point is that on a certain day surplus-jouissance became calculable, could be counted, totalised. This is where what is called the accumulation of capital begins.</span><a id="154" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#154">中</a>The extension of mathematisation to economic reality, the capture of surplus-value and the isolation of labour-power, initiated a groundbreaking change in the master’s discourse, the discursive structure that comprises both the logic of the signifier and the relations of domination. What matters in approaching the origins of capitalism is that concrete transformations in trade centres like Genoa and Venice were already embedded in a broader movement of scientific revolution, which found its ultimate expression in the implementation of formalisation in the sphere of social production. We could paraphrase Marx here: the merchants did not know what they were doing, nevertheless they were doing it. The revolution was initiated before any attempt in writing a capitalist manifesto was undertaken: the subjective and the social surplus that antiquity and Christianity treated as a deviation from a presupposed normative model of social relations was integrated into the constitution of social reality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="155" class="annotation" href="chapter_1.xhtml#155">中</a>Marx’s <span class="term">Capital</span> provides the first rigorous thought of this epistemopolitical revolution, which implies a strictly determined notion of structure: ‘Structure is therefore the real. This is in general determined by its convergence towards the impossible. Precisely in this the structure is real.’ Within the Saussurean paradigm, such a conception could not have been formulated, yet it is inevitable once structuralism is coupled to Marx’s materialist dialectics. Lacan’s Marx is a structuralist <span class="term">avant la lettre</span>, someone who enabled structuralism to ‘walk on its feet again’ by departing from the problem of discursive production. With the reinforced materialist orientation, material reduction, too, becomes more than an operation of scientific formalisation and of capitalist commodification. It becomes the privileged tool of critique for exposing the deadlocks and contradictions in the given regime of production. By grasping discourse at the root where it most effectively determines the constitution of the subject, the critique of political economy effectively demonstrates that ‘mathematical logic is highly essential for your existence in the real, whether you know it or not’. Evidently it is essential for pointing out the terrain, where politics needs to intervene in order to bring about the double transformation of the subject and of the social link. It is at this point that the Freudian notion of the unconscious most decisively continues the epistemo-political orientation of Marx’s critique.</p>
</body>
</html>
