<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>CHAPTER 2</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<h1>CHAPTER 2</h1>
	<p style="font-size:1.6rem;font-weight: bold;margin:2rem 0 0.5rem 0">The Capitalist Unconscious:</p>
	<p style="font-size:1.6rem;font-weight: bold;margin:0 0 3rem 0">A Return to Freud</p>
	<h2 id="part_1"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">W</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">ELTANSCHAUUNG</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="1" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#1">中</a>When it comes to Freud’s relation to politics, notably to Marxism, we cannot ignore his self-proclaimed indifference in political matters. However, as soon we go through his writings on culture and religion, we notice that this indifference is expressed in a rather unusual way. Freud never simply avoids political issues. Instead, he proposes a new form of addressing them, through distortions and displacements, a form that corresponds to the psychoanalytic method and to the nature of its object. It would therefore be wrong to see in the unconscious a retreat from the social into a sphere of strictly private life that has absolutely no connection to social reality. Yet it would be equally false to presuppose the existence of a collective unconscious, a container of universal cultural artefacts and archetypes. The Freudian unconscious is clearly more sophisticated. It abolishes the division of the subjective and the social, the private and the public, albeit not in the sense of the slogan ‘the personal is the political’ but in the sense that the existence and the formal mechanisms of the unconscious depend on the same structures, which determine the functioning of social links.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="2" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#2">中</a>Both Lacan’s axiom ‘the unconscious is structured like a language’ and his later claims that the unconscious ‘ex-sists’ only in discourse, address this singular status of the unconscious within social structures. This implies that the subject of the unconscious - the subject in its dependency on the signifier, and not the subject of cognition - is the subject of politics. Psychoanalysis isolates the political subject from its ideological fictions, be it homo legalis, the abstract subject of right, homo economicus, the no less abstract subject of political economy, citoyen, etc. With this distinction, the flip side to the constitution of the social is brought to light: the discursive ex-sistence of the unconscious, its insistence as an extimate discursive consequence uncovers the point, in which the given social order determines the production of subjectivity, and names the instability of the given order, the point from which emancipatory or revolutionary politics inevitably needs to depart in order to produce social change. This is, as we shall see in the following section, the main point of Marx’s determination of the proletariat as a social symptom, this concrete social embodiment of the universal subjective position in capitalism and the only possible point from which the abolition of the capitalist mode of production can be brought about. The motto shared between Marx and Freud would therefore be: the impersonal is the political - namely the impersonal core of the personal.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="3" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#3">中</a>The difference between Freud and Lacan in these matters is nevertheless striking. While Lacan never avoids polemical confrontation with the logic of capital, Freud barely addresses capitalism under its proper name. Instead, he prefers to speak about culture, thereby giving the discussion an apparently neutral, scientific and sociological tone. Another example is ideology. In his works, Freud undoubtedly develops a critique of ideology but under the screen-notion of Weltanschauung (worldview), an expression that covers everything from philosophy and politics to art and religion, designating a specific tendency in the constitution of reality, its totalisation and meaningful framing. Freud’s discussion of Marxism will take place within this perspective and within the broader epistemological framework of the distinction between the worldview knowledge and the scientific knowledge. Freud’s entire published work contains one single reflection on Marxism, and even this turns out rather disappointing, as he approaches it with the highest possible reserve. Freud expresses his lack of competence in discussing the variety of Marxist orientations and focuses merely on the so-called worldview Marxism, which enables him to envisage a logical similarity between Marxism and religion. Of course, most Marxists will be horrified by this idea. But before passing any judgment it is worth looking at the broader context of Freud’s take on the general worldview mechanisms.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="4" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#4">中</a>We find these developments in the closing chapter of Freud’s New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. The collection was published at a dramatic historical moment, 1933, four years after the economic crash and the same year in which Hitler was elected German chancellor; it was also a time when no one could ignore the dramatic failure of the Soviet revolution with the dominance of Stalinism. The lectures address a fictional audience and revise Freud’s metapsychological theories. The chapter on Weltanschauung forms an exception, both epistemologically and critically, since behind the discussion of the antagonisms between science and religion Freud simultaneously delivers his critical responses to the already widespread Freudo-Marxism, whose enfant terrible at the time was none other than Wilhelm Reich.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="5" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#5">中</a>When Freud insists that all efforts should be made to inscribe psychoanalysis in the modern scientific paradigm, he implicitly condemns the efforts in his broader circle to shape psychoanalysis in accordance with an actually existing political worldview. Certainly one could argue that the political readings of psychoanalysis are not unrelated to Freud’s discussions of social mechanisms, which already produced some sort of spontaneous political philosophy. In the face of works such as Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, on which the Frankfurt school later grounded its critique of totalitarian personality, or Civilisation and Its Discontents, which guided Marcuse’s critique of social repression, it is all the more surprising that Freud concludes not only that there is no such thing as a psychoanalytic worldview but even that every immediate application of psychoanalysis to politics should be avoided. Where does this reserve come from?</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="6" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#6">中</a>The answer lies in the logic of worldviews, as the lecture in question outlines it. Freud begins his critique by enumerating and discussing the general features of every worldview. His definition sounds classical from the outset:<span class="quote"><a id="7" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#7">中</a>In my opinion, then, a Weltanschauung is an intellectual construction, which solves all the problems of our existence uniformly on the basis of one overriding hypothesis, which, accordingly, leaves no question unanswered and in which everything that interests us finds its fixed place. It will easily be understood that the possession of a Weltanschauung of this kind is among the ideal wishes of human beings.</span><a id="8" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#8">中</a>The main achievement of a worldview thus consists in totalising reality and thereby providing its meaningful interpretation. It does not leave any questions open and situates the variety of human interests under one general hypothesis (Annahme, presupposition). At first glance, the definition does not seem to bring any novelties to the understanding of worldview mechanisms. Yet such novelty lies in the conclusion. A unifying worldview stands in a specific relation to unconscious desire, whose reality manifests itself through the construction of a given worldview. A worldview, then, appears as a neutral interpretation of the world, a construction of reality, but behind this interpretation Freud reveals a mechanism that establishes the conditions for the satisfaction of desire, a dispositif that supports its undisturbed fulfilment.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="9" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#9">中</a>In this respect, the critique of worldview mechanisms reaches back to the earliest psychoanalytic discoveries regarding the mechanisms that satisfy an unconscious tendency through the production of symbolic formations. Freud aims here notably at dreams, which are nothing less than intellectual formations that codify a demand for satisfaction, so that he extends his early wish-fulfilment theory to the way discursive mechanisms construct intersubjective reality. More precisely, through his worldview critique, Freud points out the place where the unconscious should be situated. Desire is not simply a psychological formation but the name of a specific structural dynamic that needs to be placed on the very line that joins subjective and social reality. Desire is the border beyond which there is strictly speaking no other reality: the same structure and the same formal mechanisms work in the unconscious and in the social link. Freud’s worldview critique is therefore not to be rejected as yet another psychologism.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="10" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#10">中</a>Worldviews thus raise a logical problem that Freud approaches through the work of interpretation, which amounts to the totalisation of reality. He thereby evokes the famous lines from Heine, in which the poet mocks philosophy:<span class="quote" style="text-align: center;"><a id="11" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#11">中</a>Life and the world's too fragmented for me!<br/>A German professor can give me the key.<br/>He puts life in order with skill magisterial,<br/>Builds a rational system for better or worse;<br/>With nightcap and dressing-gown scraps for material<br/>He chinks up the holes in the universe.</span><a id="12" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#12">中</a>Freud already used the very same reference in the Interpretation of Dreams to illustrate one of the main achievements of the dream work, secondary elaboration, through which unconscious labour combines the loosely linked dream material in a whole and narrated structure. The philosopher is thus comparable to the unconscious labourer, whose main task is to create the conditions for the fulfilment of unconscious desire, to interpret reality so that it will support satisfaction (clearly this is not a very flattering vision of philosophy). The more an interpretation is totalising and the more meaning it produces, the more the constituted reality successfully masks unconscious demand. The connection of desire with worldview means that unconscious fantasy is implemented in reality, that it supports the constitution of reality as a consistent and framed totality. What Freud criticises in philosophical ontologies and theories of cognition is that they remain blind to the structuring function of fantasy: there is no reality without a fantasmatic support, and, consequently, there is no discourse without the unconscious. With the same move, Freud dismisses the Freudo-Marxist hypothesis of the exclusively oppressive character of social mechanisms: social reality does not simply repress or suppress the creative potentials of desire, drive and sexuality; on the contrary, it serves as its privileged articulation and consistency. Desire is not the producer -it is itself produced, while the producer is situated elsewhere. How exactly Freud approaches the relation between desire and productive unconscious labour will be examined further below; what matters for now is that for Freud no reality is consistently objective and every worldview, every ideological construction, contains a ‘wish-fulfilment’.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="13" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#13">中</a>This logical connection between desire and interpretation that Freud encounters in worldviews explains why he categorically rejects every attempt to construct a psychoanalytic worldview. Psychoanalysis intervenes on a different level. Its function is not to provide the conditions for satisfaction but to uncover the mechanisms that articulate unconscious desire in a specific dispositif of satisfaction, thereby revealing that behind the apparent conflict between this desire and social reality there is a certain complicity between desire and interpretation. For this reason, psychoanalysis does not ‘liberate desires’. It rather transforms, through interpretation, the formal mechanism of satisfaction, directing the subject towards the problematic kernel of the unconscious mode of production. This is the main point of the famous Freudian Wo Es war soll Ich werden: where there seems to have been an automatic regime of production, the unconscious mode of jouissance, there the place of the subject should be revealed, a place where a subjectivation can take place. And this subjectivation entails a transformation of the overall mechanism. The task of psychoanalysis is thus in clear opposition to worldviews. It does not interpret reality by feeding it with more meaning - it creates the conditions under which the subject will be able to produce a transformative act. This change appears to be impossible due to repression, which is actually the case, although the Freudian notion of repression differs significantly from suppression or oppression. For Freud, the mechanisms of repression are constitutive of the unconscious tendency, and if we want to attribute to the unconscious ‘productive potential’, then it does not pertain to the repressed desire but to repression itself, in which Freud recognises productive unconscious labour.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="14" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#14">中</a>Freud’s response to the attempts to construct a psychoanalytic worldview is highly enigmatic: ‘As a specialist science, a branch of psychology - a depth psychology or psychology of the unconscious - [psychoanalysis] is entirely unsuitable to construct a Weltanschauung of its own: it must assume the scientific one.’ Psychoanalysts should refrain from inventing a worldview because there is an underlying incompatibility between psychoanalysis and worldview-tendencies, which makes psychoanalysis appear as a saboteur. Consequently, an analyst cannot unveil the underlying mechanisms that support the satisfaction of unconscious tendencies and provide conditions for their perpetuated satisfaction. The contradiction between psychoanalysis and ideological tendencies could not be sharper. But the conclusion Freud draws from this contrast is that not even the analysts can do entirely without a worldview, so they should simply follow the example of the father of psychoanalysis, who adopted the scientific one. Freud’s persistent claim to a scientific status of psychoanalysis is only seemingly neutral. It actually contains a scientistic worldview, a fulfilment of Freud’s ‘epistemological’ desire.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="15" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#15">中</a>Behind the apparent unsuitability of forming a consistent worldview there is a more fundamental impossibility. Psychoanalysis cannot totalise reality, nor can it predict future events in mental life, and, finally, it reveals that even the past is subjected to retroactive modifications. The past is not a state but a movement. These restrictions differentiate psychoanalysis from other positive sciences, notably from physics, medicine and biology, on which Freud wanted to construct the scientificity of his invention and which are all orientated towards the future and can presumably predict events based on the already acquired knowledge. The limits of psychoanalysis logically follow from the status of the unconscious, which is by far neither an ontological substance nor a positive entity. It entirely depends on contingent and unpredictable traumatic events and on the dynamic of linguistic structures, so that no particular case is universal enough to support the prediction of future developments, which is, in the end, an important part of the achievement of worldviews: the exclusion of contingency from reality, life and thinking. The unconscious may be marked by the absence of time, and even by the absence of contradiction, as Freud occasionally claimed, but this absence is misleading. It does not automatically imply that the unconscious is unchangeable; it rather demonstrates its dependency on the actually existing social condition and hence on the ‘eternity’ of ruling ideologies. As Althusser argued, the absence of time and the deformation of social antagonisms represent two central features of ideology, which consequently appears as neutral and coextensive with reality. But while Althusser declared every subject to be an imaginary effect of ideology, Lacan recognised in the subject of the signifier the central discursive consequence on which the difference of psychoanalysis from sciences and worldviews rested. If psychoanalysis wants to join positive sciences, it must abandon the hypothesis of the subject of the unconscious: herein lies the risk of Freud’s attempts to ground psychoanalysis on energetics, neurology and biology. If, however, it wishes to produce a consistent worldview, it has to recentralise the subject: the ego should dominate the id, as many of Freud’s successors interpreted Wo Es war soll Ich werden. Ego-psychology and various forms of psychotherapy remain within the capitalist ideological framework and even openly adopt the centralised subjectivity of economic liberalism - namely a subjectivity, which is consolidated around the egoistic pursuit of private interest, just as in the context of cognition the subject is consolidated around the self-transparent consciousness or intentionality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="16" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#16">中</a>A more general problem concerns the idea of a scientific worldview. Does it make sense to speak of such a worldview at all? What does it designate? The personal convictions of scientists, their ‘spontaneous philosophies’? To stick to Freud’s definition, a scientific worldview should not be an exception. In order to seriously compete with philosophy or religion, it would have to solve all problems of human existence, provide a meaningful interpretation of reality and finally articulate guiding principles for social life. In short, it would have to produce knowledge, belief and ethics. Modern science fulfils merely the first condition. What might come close to a scientific worldview are the ideals of enlightenment. Let us recall their Kantian summary:<span class="quote"><a id="17" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#17">中</a>Enlightenment is mans emergence from his self-incurred immaturity. Immaturity is the inability to use one’s own understanding without the guidance of another. This immaturity is self-incurred if its cause is not lack of understanding, but lack of resolution and courage to use it without the guidance of another. The motto of enlightenment is therefore: Sapere aude! Have courage to use your own understanding!</span><a id="18" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#18">中</a>Would a scientific worldview entail universalisation of the courage to know, the social implementation of a presumably epistemological desire that would awaken the subject from its ignorance? Acheronta movebo, the Virgil quote that Freud placed to the head of Interpretation of Dreams, announcing that his publication shall shift the underground regions, repeating the Copernican revolution in psychic life, can be read together with the Kantian Sapere aude. Freud had his most evident moment of enthusiasm for the enlightenment in The Future of an Illusion, his most explicit confrontation with religion, predicting the triumph of scientific knowledge over ‘religious illusions’. Along the same lines, the New Introductory Lectures express a hope that ‘the intellect - the scientific spirit, reason - may in process of time establish a dictatorship in the mental life of man’. Thus for Freud a scientifically supported dictatorship of reason in mental life is the political ideal of psychoanalysis. Except that this reason, this psychoanalytic cogito, is unconscious, so that the dictatorship of reason would be an impossible dictatorship of the decentralised subject of the signifier that would replace the current capitalist dictatorship of the ‘strong ego’ (what Lacan called Je-cratie, I-cracy). Is the dictatorship of reason a psychoanalytic response to the dictatorship of the proletariat, maybe even just an extravagant name for it? Freud would then be only one step away from Lacan’s identification of the proletarian with the subject of the unconscious.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="19" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#19">中</a>On other occasions, Freud claims that modern science harms human narcissism, thereby leaving no doubt that scientific knowledge satisfies no desire whatsoever. The main condition for the formation of a scientific worldview falls away. To recall again, Freud mentions three scientific insults: the decentralisation of the universe in physics, which abolished the ancient idea of the finite, centralised and harmonious cosmic order with the infinite and contingent universe; then the decentralisation of life in biology, which abolished the hierarchy of beings with man as its privileged metaphysical crown; and finally the decentralisation of thinking in psychoanalysis, which questioned the primacy of consciousness and most definitely rejected the hypothesis of a metaphysical soul. The modern scientific paradigm has exactly the opposite effect of worldview mechanisms. Instead of totalising and stabilising both the external and the internal reality, it deprives them of their centre; instead of grounding them on necessity and order, it exposes their contingency and instability; and finally, instead of producing their meaningful interpretation, it reduces them to nonsensical formal mechanisms. A scientific worldview consequently follows an entirely different logic: production of falsifiable (uncertain, provisory) knowledge, de-totalisation and foreclosure of meaning.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="20" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#20">中</a>Freud determines the psychoanalytic relation to the scientific worldview by using the ambiguous expression annehmen. This can either mean that the scientific worldview already exists and psychoanalysis merely has to reach out and adopt it; or it can also suggest that such a worldview is simply presupposed, which would imply that positive sciences as such assume the position of a ‘subject supposed to know’, and indeed Freud often treats positive sciences in such a way. Finally, the Annahme, the assumption Freud talks about in relation to the scientific worldview, can also be understood in a formal sense, as the announcement of a concurrent regime of interpretation that will undermine the established worldview-form. This is what the Freudian idea of revolutionary sciences seems to address. While the existing worldviews satisfy ‘human narcissism’, scientific decentralisations inflict wounds because a concurrent, essentially materialist worldview announces itself at least on the logical level. The struggle between science and religion is first and foremost a conflict between two concurrent forms of thinking. The scientific worldview does not depart from the tendency of providing definite answers to human questions but reformulates the questions themselves. It also does not satisfy desire but alters the subject’s relation to it. The break with the worldview interpretation is a matter of formalisation because it is only here that a concurrent regime of interpretation can be approached.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="21" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#21">中</a>This Freudian epistemological optimism is nevertheless marked by a significant shift. The pessimistic turn that accompanies writings such as Beyond the Pleasure Principle and Civilisation and Its Discontents encounters a new problem. Instead of discussing the historic conflict between science and religion, it turns to modern culture, precisely to capitalism, where the political potential of modern scientific revolution met a more challenging limit that again concerns a specific form of thinking, the commodity form. The modern worldview operates within these formal constrictions, and in this respect the main failure of the scientific revolution consists in the incapacity to detach thinking from universal commodification; and even more so in its complicity with capitalism, the embedding of scientific knowledge in the permanent capitalist revolution. Freud’s pessimist turn is closely related to the fact that the universality of commodity form successfully integrated scientific knowledge into the capitalist mode of production and into its articulation of desire. What Marx described as commodity fetishism stands above all for a specific transformation of desire within and through the implementation of the capitalist worldview in social and subjective reality. The four cornerstones of this worldview (freedom, equality, property and private interest)form an abstract coordinate system, in which the sharpness of revolutionary sciences is neutralised in advance.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="22" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#22">中</a>At this point we can move to Freud’s engagement with the Marxist worldview in his lecture on Weltanschauung. After expressing his lack of competence in discussing Marxism, he sums up his reservations in the following passage:<span class="quote"><a id="23" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#23">中</a>Theoretical Marxism, as realised in Russian Bolshevism, has acquired the energy and the self-contained and exclusive character of a Weltanschauung, but at the same time an uncanny likeness to what it is fighting against. Though originally a portion of science and built up, in its implementation, upon science and technology, it has created a prohibition of thought which is just as ruthless as was that of religion in the past.</span><a id="24" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#24">中</a>Freud then continues with how the critical confrontation with Marxism is forbidden and how the Soviet regime produced a fetishisation of Marx’s works that is comparable to that of religious texts, and so on. Freud’s critique of the worldview Marxism resembles a typical right-wing moralisation, yet there is something symptomatic in his discontent, something that goes beyond the moralistic tone of his remarks and concerns the very outcome of the Soviet revolution: the epistemic transformation of Marx’s critique into dogmatism and the recentralisation of his theory of the subject. Freud does not talk about Marx but about scientific socialism; and the outcome of the revolution is not so much Lenin but Stalin, the bureaucrat and not the revolutionary.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="25" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#25">中</a>Lenin nevertheless announced the worldview tendency of Marxism, when he wrote: ‘Marx’s theory is omnipotent because it is true. It is comprehensive and harmonious, it gives men a unified worldview’. Lacan returned to this passage on several occasions in order to claim the same link between omnipotence and truth for Freud’s invention of psychoanalysis, and it is rather symptomatic that the citations of this passage often omit Lenin’s specification of this omnipotence and truth. Worldview Marxism is the necessary step to dogmatism, where the dialectical materialist method that oriented the critique of political economy is replaced by the three nondialectical worldview achievements. Lacan, too, envisaged this inversion when he expressed his astonishment that the majority of Marxists depart from the primacy of a specific figure of subjectivity, which is only subsequently alienated in the commodity form, in the process of production and in the movement of History, while Marx’s critical project openly departs from the autonomy of value, which consequently helps him discover the decentralised subject of politics, labour-power, and its privileged social embodiment, the proletariat. The foundation of Marxism as a worldview demanded the abolition of this critical ground of Marx’s theory:<span class="quote"><a id="26" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#26">中</a>The proletariat means what? It means that labour is radicalised on the level of pure and simple commodity, which also reduces the labourer to the same price. As soon as the labourer learns to know himself as such through theory, we can say that this step shows him the way to the status of-call it what you want - a scientist [savant]. He is no longer a proletarian an sich, if I may say so, he is no longer pure and simple truth, but he is für sich, what we call class-consciousness. He can even become the Party’s class-consciousness where one no longer speaks the truth.</span><a id="27" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#27">中</a>The failure of the Communist Party would then consist in the fact that, in the end, it was the worldview-form which determined the political organisation and sabotaged the invention of a new party-form, and not the other way around. This political failure is accompanied by an entire set of epistemological regressions, which have already been mentioned.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="28" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#28">中</a>The difference between Marx’s interpretation of the proletariat as the social embodiment-personification of the truth of labour, and worldview Marxism, which promises to abolish alienation and to constitute a revolutionary subject of cognition, overlaps with the difference between truth and knowledge. The Soviet regime replaced the social embodiment of truth, the proletarian as the true subject of revolutionary politics, with a particular social embodiment of knowledge, the party as the placeholder of the collective subject of knowledge and the Subject of History. Again, the movement of the critique of political economy proceeds exactly in the opposite direction, from the economic forms of knowledge to the progressive deduction of the subject of value, where also the horizon of a possible transformation is outlined, albeit without a prospective insight into the future social order: this is where Marx, too, adopted what Freud called the scientific worldview. Worldview Marxism reverts from this critical perspective by reducing the subject of capitalism back to knowledge, making of the proletarian a savant, a scientist, subject of cognition, in which the proletarian knows itself as knowledge. The point of departure is no longer the identity of alienation and structure, which in the end determines the gap between the subject of cognition and the subject of politics. This critical point of departure is now replaced by the hypothesis of a centralised and unalienated Subject of History, which supposedly reaches the highest form of self-consciousness through the Party, another subject supposed to know. The problem is not so much in the introduction of the party but in the fact that the party becomes the privileged embodiment of a presupposed historical knowledge and not an organisation that opens up the space in which the historical and political truth embodied in the working class and in the surplus population can be transmitted. The Party appears as the perfect opposition of what, for instance, Lacan strived to establish through the idea of the School, founded on the imperative of renewing the sharp razor of Freudian truth, the gap between knowledge and truth, and to insist on the inexistence of the Other, which stands for the impossibility of the ultimate abolition of alienation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="29" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#29">中</a>By reintroducing the subject of cognition into the critique of political economy through the hypothesis of class-consciousness, worldview Marxism futilely seeks to abolish all forms of alienation and establish authentic intersubjective relations. It thereby regresses into a pre-critical framework. The Party’s class-consciousness is the end-result of this movement: one no longer speaks (of) the truth, only (of) knowledge, which is most faithfully embodied in the Party’s bureaucratic apparatus. Positive scientific knowledge - and this explains Stalin’s tendency to provide an essentially positivistic foundation for dialectical materialism - serves as the point where the subject of capitalism can presumably reach a promised self-realisation beyond alienation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="30" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#30">中</a>Freud’s theory of the subject saw a similar fate, when the post-Freudians recentralised the subject on the ego and deduced from Freud’s Wo Es war soll Ich werden an imperative of normalisation and reintegration. Lacan’s political struggle against the International Psychoanalytic Association, the psychoanalytic analogue of the Stalinist Party, for which the strong ego is the central instance in mental life, repeatedly turned around the translation of this ambiguous Freudian axiom. Post-Freudians have read it through the lenses of the theory of cognition and in closest compatibility with economic liberalism, while Lacan, in contrast, made it his privileged formula for alienation that constitutes the subject of the unconscious and points towards the real subject of politics.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="31" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#31">中</a>Aside from all of the humanistic and moralistic appearances, Freud’s critique of worldviews brings him suspiciously close to the break that inaugurated Marx’s critique of political economy. The lecture on Weltanschauung contains a certain repetition of the critical programme from Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach, which leaves no doubt that for Marx political struggles necessarily address the form of the interpretation of the world, not so much through the all too simple opposition of theory (worldview interpretation) and praxis (political action) but through the actual subversion of the very praxis of interpretation. Among the many targets of Marx and Freud’s critique is philosophy, of which they promote a highly problematic and out dated image. But this detail should not distract us from the fact that the true object of their critique is religion and political economy, their competition with philosophical interpretations, which in the capitalist universe clearly are found in a worse position, discredited in advance as ‘self-centred’ and ‘unprofitable’. Philosophy and science are simply not as successful when it comes to satisfying desire.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="32" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#32">中</a>For the critique of political economy, the form of interpretation will be no less important as the organisation of the proletariat. And indeed, the transformation of the form of interpretation necessitates the form of organisation. When Marx examines the intertwining of the social form and the commodity form, or Freud the intertwining of the worldview mechanisms and the unconscious mechanisms of satisfaction, this already presupposes an inversion in the form of interpretation, which, in psychoanalysis and in the critique of political economy, supports their critique of appearances and recognises in the commodity form the general envelope of social links and unconscious production.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="33" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#33">中</a>Another crucial aspect of Marx’s critique of appearance, to repeat, concerns the break with the humanism and the essentialism of Feuerbach’s conception of alienation. Marx’s mature discussion of fetishism no longer departs from the illusion that the commodity form distorts more immediate and authentic social relations. Here it makes sense to repeat the distinction between constitutive alienation - alienation that is equivalent to structure - and constituted alienation - for instance, commodity fetishism, which follows from the misperception of the relation between the appearance of value and the structure that causes this appearance. The doubling of alienation does not prevent their confusion. This is what Marx criticised in Feuerbach. Simultaneously, the twofold character of alienation reveals that constituted alienation functions as a mask or a mystification of the constitutive alienation. The flip side of commodity fetishism is the appearance that there is a more fundamental and unalienated position in the background, a position from which it would be possible to cognise the mistake that determines commodity fetishism - precisely the position of an unsplit and conflict-free ego or consciousness, this common presupposition of political economy, post-Freudian psychoanalysis and scientific Marxism. Homo oeconomicus, strong ego and class-consciousness are conceptual and ideological variations of the same attempt to mystify the subjective split produced by the autonomy of discourse.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="34" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#34">中</a>In distinction to these attempts to abolish alienation, which really do deserve to be called utopian, Marx’s critique of political economy contains an effort to think alienation not only as reproduction of the relations of production but also as a structural transformation of the existing mode of production. We cannot overlook that the double meaning of the term ‘revolution’ is at stake here, the scientific (circular movement of astronomic bodies) and the political (subversion of the given social order). There is also no doubt that constitutive alienation does not address solely the alienation of the subject but above all the alienation of the Other: it makes the Other appear in its split, incompleteness, contradiction and therefore inexistence. The correlate of this inexistence is the existence of the subject, the actual agency of the revolutionary process, which, however, does not assume the position of knowledge but the place of truth, as Lacan persistently repeated. Because the subject is produced, brought into existence in and through the gap in the Other, in other words, because there is a social entity, the proletariat, which articulates a universal demand for change in the name of all (being the social embodiment of a universal subjective position), this very enunciation grounds politics on the link between inexistence, alienation and universality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="35" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#35">中</a>Capitalism, by contrast, rooted its politics on the hypothetical existence of the Other (the Market and other economic abstractions), the strong ego of a fictitious economic subject (the narcissism of private interest)and social segregation. Before anyone remarks that we have seen in the communist experiments how the political consequences of inexistence, alienation and universality look in practice, let us recall that the twentieth-century communist regimes failed in all three tasks. They have supported their political projects on the triad of History, class-consciousness (even if they were not all Lukacsian) and the no less intense forms of segregation. The political task of a Party that wants to claim the predicate ‘communist’ remains in insisting at this interplay of the subject’s existence and the inexistence of History, just as for Lacan the politics of his School was rooted in the existence of the subject of the unconscious and the inexistence of the Other. With his critical move, Marx grounded the first theory of the subject that presupposed the total abolition of two central worldview illusions, human essence and social homeostasis, on which the capitalist worldview is grounded. Abstract freedom and abstract equality presuppose an equally abstract human essence, while private property and private interest ground the social consensus, behind which there is nevertheless a fundamental submission of political universalism to the particular interest of capital. The proletariat (the social embodiment of the subject) and class struggle (a concrete manifestation of the inexistence of the Other) represent two critical responses to the construction of a worldview and openly sabotage the undisturbed satisfaction of the insatiable capitalist imperative of creation of value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="36" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#36">中</a>Marx addressed the necessity of displacing the struggle from the interpretation of reality - the infamous ‘conflict of interpretations’ - to the form of interpretation in his often cited and almost as often misunderstood 11th thesis on Feuerbach: ‘The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to change it’. The thesis formulates the opposition between interpretation and change, theory and praxis, philosophy and revolutionary politics. Here, worldview Marxism is disqualified from the very outset. It may have brought about a revolutionary change but it adopted an interpretation of history that pushed it back in the centralised and totalising framework of a worldview. Even a reactionary thinker like Heidegger understood that Marx’s final thesis in fact questions the dichotomy between thinking and action and conditions the actual change of the world with the change of the form of interpretation, thereby articulating a demand for a new form of philosophy that would account for the change. Behind the apparent opposition of theory and praxis, the 11th thesis opposes two heterogeneous logical regimes of interpretation. All past philosophies presumably remained within the dispositif of worldview interpretations, where the change, the conflictuality of the historic movement is excluded from interpretation, or where History and Reality know no contradiction.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="37" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#37">中</a>Looking back at the history of philosophy, one can, of course, immediately object that it would be difficult to find philosophers who were merely occupied with the static interpretation of reality, without raising the question of political change: from Plato’s ideal state, theorised on the background of the crisis of Greek polis, via Descartes’s foundation of philosophy on the changes introduced by scientific modernity, up to Kant, Fichte and Hegel’s enthusiasm for the French Revolution. Philosophers seem to have been more preoccupied with thinking possible changes rather than interpreting the given order and filling the gaps in reality. But, as already stated, the problem of the critical interpretation in Marx concerns first and foremost the closed world of universal commodification, where the commodity form is the ultimate horizon of other forms of thinking and where the change already is the actual state of things, the permanent revolution mentioned by the Communist Manifesto. Reality already includes change, but what the critique of interpretation envisages is an articulation of political theory and practice that departs from the formalisation of the structural contradictions that determine the functioning of social links, as well as the consequent abolition of the hypothetical Other and of the centralised model of subjectivity. The Theses target young Hegelians and political economists, and not so much philosophy as a whole. Marx’s insistence that a materialist theory of the subject conceives the latter as a consequence of social relations and not on a false hypothesis of an abstract human essence indicates that the displacement of the accent from interpretation to change should also be read as a shift in the understanding of change itself. In the capitalist-scientific universe where reality essentially comes down to permanent change, the latter loses its a priori revolutionary character. The structural change that could bring about a new social link, abolish the abstract universality of commodity form and construct a new figure of political subject presupposes a correct interpretation of the given logic of change, the conditions of the permanent capitalist revolution. Again, the point of departure should be that ‘the Other is lacking’ (Lacan), and from this viewpoint it is not astonishing that a major portion of philosophy seems to fall into the totalising regime of interpretation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="38" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#38">中</a>In his critique of worldviews, Freud outlines their three central functions and exemplifies them in reference to the conflict between modern science, the motor of revolutionary changes in the register of knowledge, and Christianity, the most persistent and consistent worldview in history, which successfully integrates every change in its form of interpretation:<span class="quote"><a id="39" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#39">中</a>If we are to give an account of the grandiose nature of religion, we must bear in mind what it undertakes to do for human beings. It gives them information about the origin and coming into existence of the universe, it assures them of its protection and of ultimate happiness in the ups and downs of life and it directs their thoughts and actions by precepts, which it lays down with its whole authority. Thus it fulfils three functions. With the first of them it satisfies the human thirst for knowledge; it does the same thing that science attempts to do with its means, and at that point enters into rivalry with it. It is to its second function that it no doubt owes the greatest part of its influence. Science can be no match for it when it soothes the fear that men feel of the dangers and vicissitudes of life, when it assures them of a happy ending and offers them comfort in unhappiness. . . In its third function, in which it issues precepts and lays down prohibitions and restrictions, religion is furthest away from science. For science is content to investigate and to establish facts, though it is true that in its application rules and advice are derived from the conduct of life.</span><a id="40" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#40">中</a>The knowledge of a worldview satisfies the desire for knowledge much better than science, with its epistemological revolutions and instabilities. Worldviews, in addition, produce meaning, which satisfies the desire for persistence; and, finally, they generate order, which satisfies the desire for security, excluding the change from the realms of reality. A worldview first and foremost produces a reality that appears to function, a reality without lack or negativity.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="41" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#41">中</a>With these three achievements in mind the contrast between Marx’s critique of political economy and worldview Marxism becomes even more striking. Marx precisely does not ‘solve all the problems of human existence based on an underlying hypothesis’; on the contrary, he formulates the central problem of modern political thought: commodity form as the ultimate horizon of social relations in capitalism. The ruling ideologies insist that Marxism is a worldview, the object of which is not the way things are, the ‘question of being’, but the way things should be, the question of change, not the present but the future. However, Marx’s critique is neither a worldview nor a utopian theory. It is rather a reclaiming - as an object of thinking and as the condition of politics and revolutionary change - of an irreducible negativity that traverses social and subjective reality, and of which no one can be excepted: there is no metaposition that would ground politics on positive knowledge, but there is the subjective position, which grounds politics on conflictual truth. The notion of class struggle replaces the old, inadequate questions and answers, the social or the economic contract, with a new, radicalised problem: rather than being backed by some mythical contract, convention or relation, society rests on an irreducible struggle and social non-relation. Capitalism exploits this non-relation, but it can do so only under the condition of mystifying the actual source of wealth with a multitude of ideological fictions, fantasies and fetishisations.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="42" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#42">中</a>In political economy, Marx uncovers the same three tendencies that, according to Freud, support the efficiency of religion. These three tendencies come down to the endeavour to ground the market on stable and predictable laws, which turn it into a positive Other that will support a fully functioning social relation. The association of economy with religious mechanisms is most evidently formulated in the famous lines of The Poverty of Philosophy, where Marx describes the metaphysical-theological tendencies of political economy:<span class="quote"><a id="43" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#43">中</a>Economists have a singular method of procedure. There are only two kinds of institutions for them, artificial and natural. The institutions of feudalism are artificial institutions, those of the bourgeoisie are natural institutions. In this, they resemble the theologians, who likewise establish two kinds of religion. Every religion which is not theirs is an invention of men, while their own is an emanation from God. When the economists say that present-day relations-the relations of bourgeois production -are natural, they imply that these are the relations in which wealth is created and productive forces developed in conformity with the laws of nature. These relations therefore are themselves natural laws independent of the influence of time. They are eternal laws which must always govern society. Thus, there has been history, but there is no longer any. There has been history since there were the institutions of feudalism, and in these institutions of feudalism we find quite different relations of production from those of bourgeois society, which the economists try to pass off as natural and as such, eternal.</span><a id="44" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#44">中</a>Smith’s figure of the invisible hand remains the best expression of this metaphysical aspiration of political economy. In the market, it presupposes a pregiven rational knowledge, which makes the market appear as an autonomous subject. When Marx later describes the relation of political economy to the capitalist abstractions as fetishist, he implicitly situates this relation, not on the level of perversion, but on the level of transference. In order to envisage the persistence of this attitude in political economy, one merely needs to recall the jargon of contemporary advocates of neoliberal reforms. As the crisis persists, we get bombarded by warnings that radical measures are needed in order to ‘send a positive signal’ to the markets. The function of reforms and of austerity measures is to ‘calm the markets’. The formulations are more than mere rhetorical figures; they actually demonstrate the fetishist disavowal that Octave Mannoni condensed in the famous phrase Je sais bien, mais quand même: I know very well (that the markets are mere constructions and human inventions) but nevertheless (I believe that they are autonomous and capricious). A double mistake is at work here: yes, the markets are human inventions, but they contain an autonomous dimension, which determines social and subjective reality, and this autonomy is not correctly situated. The reason lies in the fact that political economy, in its apparent rationality and false scientificity, inevitably contains the inversion of the aforementioned fetishisation: I know very well that the markets are autonomous and capricious, but I nevertheless believe that they are mere constructions and human inventions.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="45" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#45">中</a>In any case, the autonomy of the structural relations that support the functioning of the market is not taken seriously. Political economy in the same move fetishises economic abstractions as autonomous entities and relativises the dimension of causality in this autonomy by regressing back to the false sobriety of conventionalism. The fact is that the economic crisis does not undermine the fetishist relation to the market, it does not unveil the inexistence of the market Other; on the contrary, the more the crisis unveils the instability of the markets, the more the Market receives a surplus of positive existence. What nevertheless becomes observable is that the capitalist Market seems to be much closer to the God of the Old Testament than to the benevolent and abstract God of philosophers and political economists: not the neutral and self-regulating knowledge of the invisible hand but a desiring God that demands constant sacrifice, not a homeostatic order but a negativity, whose consequences are devastating.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="46" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#46">中</a>In addition, the imposition of economic reforms and austerity measures as inevitable and quasi-metaphysical necessities recalls the privileged appearance of class struggle in the first volume of Capital, where its paradigm is the struggle for the length of the working day. Is today this struggle not indicated in the debates regarding the length, not of the working day, but of the working life? One can repeat Marx here: capitalists have their own idea of the ultimate limit of the working life. Evidently a working life cannot be longer than biological life: the ultimate end of the working life is biological death. However, death can be postponed through the improvement of life conditions and medical interventions, biopolitics and so on. The argumentation for the extension of work periods comes down to the argument that the life expectancy in Europe is today longer than it was in the past, the population grows older, and for this reason the neoliberal reforms are said to be inevitable. Every extension of the working life abolishes past achievements of the worker’s struggles in a more efficient manner that an extension of the working day ever would. Life and work become inseparable; the entire lifespan is transformed into the precarious life in work.</p>
	<h2 id="part_2"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">T</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">HE LABOUR THEORY OF THE UNCONSClOUS</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="47" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#47">中</a>Freud’s critique of worldviews stands in continuity with the main conclusions of the Interpretation of Dreams. It is well known that this work, in which Freud for the first time systematised his theory of the unconscious, turns around an apparently banal statement: dreams are wish-fulflments. Yet behind this simplicity lies a complex structure that reveals the problematic status of this ‘wish’: Before entering the discussion of the Freudian dream analysis, we should recall the specificity and the epistemological weight of the Freudian approach in relation to his predecessors. Freud was certainly not the first one to attribute a theoretical value and meaning to dreams. The theoretical tradition goes back to Aristotle, and in the first sections of his work Freud leaves no doubt that he did his homework when presenting an exhaustive and detailed account of the past approaches, including psychology, philosophy, literature and so on. The Interpretation of Dreams proposes to move beyond their meaning to the formal mechanisms that can be recognised in the dream processes, thereby isolating their function of satisfaction. In doing so, Freud discovers that behind the production of meaning, narration and visualisation there is another level of the dream text and another production. Here I want to focus on two main features of the Freudian notion of the unconscious, the already mentioned dimension of production, immanently doubled in the production of meaning and the production of satisfaction, and the central role of unconscious labour in the process that supports the satisfaction of the unconscious tendency. The fact that the longest chapter of the Interpretation of Dreams engages with Traumarbeit, dream work, should be taken seriously. Psychoanalysis begins with a labour theory of the unconscious.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="48" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#48">中</a>The first complication is already on the level of terminology. In the book, Freud does not talk about desire (Begierde) but wish (Wunsch). This terminological choice makes the structural point of Freud’s analysis of satisfaction more difficult to grasp, since Wunsch in everyday use designates a desire that aims at a specific object, while Begierde appears as desire without a strictly determined object. From this nuance, practically all Freud’s troubles in ‘selling’ the idea of an unconscious wish to the scientific community emerge, a wish that is not simply without an object but, at the same time, does not aim at an empirical, immediate or concrete object either. The unconscious desire is neither Wunsch nor Begierde but somehow a third category that both abolishes and complicates the dichotomy of the presence and absence of the object, or, more precisely, demands a rethinking of what an object is.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="49" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#49">中</a>Wish-fulfilment results from the manipulation of psychic material, the ‘day residues’. This requires a consumption of energy that can, in the end, be quantified and hence understood in terms of labour-power. This explains Freud’s strong interest in energetics, which became crucial in his later efforts to construct an energetics of the drives but is already present in his abandoned early attempt to ground a (positivist) scientific psychology (1895). The idea of unconscious production, approached through the notion of labour-power, thus forms the central difference between Freud and his predecessors, who saw in the unconscious either unclear representations or psychic depth, subconsciousness. The unconscious labour also cannot be conceived without the double character of labour in capitalism. In English, this division is inscribed into language, ‘work’ and ‘labour’, which cover both aspects of commodities, use-value and exchange-value. This linguistic inscription was already pointed out by Engels in an editorial footnote to Marx’s Capital: ‘Labour which creates use-values and is qualitatively determined is called “work” as opposed to “labour”; labour which creates value and is only measured quantitatively is “labour”, as opposed to “work”. Engels accentuates the opposition between qualitative and quantitative labour, between sensual qualities and discursive matter. A commodity does not merely abolish or solve the contradiction between both poles, thereby becoming matter with qualities; it consists only as this split. Engels’s comment relates to the passage in which Marx links the two aspects of commodity with labour and production:<span class="quote"><a id="50" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#50">中</a>On the one hand, all labour is an expenditure of human labour-power, in the physiological sense, and it is in this character of being equal, or abstract, human labour that it creates and forms the value of commodities. On the other hand, all labour is an expenditure of human labour-power in a particular form and with a definite aim, and it is in this character of being concrete useful labour that it produces use-values.</span><a id="51" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#51">中</a>Here Marx most clearly situates the split in labour: all labour is on both sides at the same time; the question is therefore not that the commodity form would in any way encroach labour and introduce its inadequate representation. We are dealing with a parallax structure, according to which labour appears first on one side and then on the other, once as abstract matter, labour-power, once as concrete form, labour-process. In the same move Marx shows that his mature critical materialist orientation implies a more sophisticated and openly anti-empiricist notion of matter, which privileges the apparently ‘abstract’ discursive materiality, where labour-power and surplus-value can finally be thought as real discursive consequences, over the misleading ‘concrete’ empirical materiality, whose product is an apparently univocal commodity.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="52" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#52">中</a>With the division between abstract and concrete labour in mind, unconscious labour falls on the side of abstract labour, notably because it cannot be associated with a concrete psychological agent. Freud will additionally complicate the matter by showing that unconscious production is not univocal either. It brings about two achievements and is itself internally doubled. The satisfaction of desire thus contains two satisfactions, in accordance with the double character of commodities, which now reflects on the couple ‘wish’ and ‘desire’. The minimal difference between meaning and satisfaction conserves the division of use-value and value, as is also the case with meaning and linguistic value in Saussure. This difference is noticeable in Freud’s emphasis on the quantitative factor in dream work and his insistence that the imaginary aspect of dreams should not seduce us in believing that nothing logically different takes place behind the visualisation:<span class="quote"><a id="53" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#53">中</a>The dream-thoughts and the dream-content are presented to us like two versions of the same subject-matter in two different languages. Or, more properly, the dream content seems like a transcript of the dream-thoughts into another mode of expression, whose characters and syntactic laws it is our business to discover by comparing the original and the translation. The dream-thoughts are immediately comprehensible, as soon as we have learnt them. The dream-content, on the other hand, is expressed as it were in a pictographic script [Bilderschrift], the characters of which have to be transposed individually into the language of the dream-thoughts. If we attempted to read these characters according to their pictorial value [Bilderwert] instead of according to their symbolic relation [Zeichenbeziehung], we should clearly be led into error.</span><a id="54" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#54">中</a>Dreams are like commodities: hieroglyphs (the actual meaning of Bilderschrift), where meaning and value should be differentiated. Hence Freud’s insistence that we should pass from the imaginary to the symbolic, the focus on Zeichenbeziehung, the relation between signs independently from their meaningful and adequate relation to images. Just like commodities, dreams, too, appear as an unproblematic universal experience that everyone seems to understand spontaneously. The more their formal analysis progresses, the more their complexity becomes apparent and the deeper the gap between their pictographic script, the imaginary aspect of dreams, and their structure. And again, just as commodities, dreams bring together two languages, not the original and the translation but the language of values and the language of meaning (need, communication), which in the end resume the split within one and the same language. These two levels do not overlap, their interaction is merely accidental, but they both need to be taken into account in order to understand unconscious production, just as we cannot simply omit use-value from the production of value, since we thereby lose the entire paradox of the commodity form. Focusing only on the sequence of dream images, the product appears to us senseless and worthless, without meaning or value, and the ‘science of dreams’ (as Freud’s volume was initially titled in French translation) is only possible through the shift from the appearance of meaning to the logic of value. The science of dreams is also a science of value. With this move, Freud outlines the structural background that supports both the production of meaning in a seemingly senseless sequence of images, and the articulation of a demand for satisfaction that aims beyond the meaning of dreams and that can solely open up the ‘royal road to a knowledge of the unconscious’, the autonomy of the signifier that marked Lacan’s first return to Freud. The Interpretation of Dreams without any doubt grounds psychoanalysis as a logic and not as a hermeneutic of the unconscious.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="55" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#55">中</a>Let us move on to unconscious labour. The dream work stands for various formal operations. Freud names them condensation, displacement, consideration of representability and secondary elaboration. Unconscious labour is already implied in the inverted relation between concrete and abstract labour, which prevents the identification of unconscious labour with the psychological subject. Marx pointed out the fundamental achievement of the capitalist decentralisation of labour when he claimed that the capitalist and scientific development of the means of production does not free the labourer from labour but instead frees labour of its content, which means that labour is freed first and foremost of the empirical labourer, while the inverse, the liberation of the labourer from labour, appears as an impossible task. The liberation of labour radicalizes the dependency of the labourer on labour, it accomplishes the transformation of the subject into labour-power, a commodified, capitalist subject. There is more at stake in this asymmetry than the fact that abstract labour simply becomes the privileged representation of all concrete forms of labour, or that exchange-value abstracts from use-value, thereby making of labour, too, an abstraction. Because of the asymmetrical relation between abstract and concrete labour, no return to concrete and presumably more authentic forms of labour will abolish the alienation of labour. The alienation of labour is, of course, not a result of capitalism, no more as is discursive alienation. What is its achievement, though, is the objectification of this alienation in a specific commodity.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="56" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#56">中</a>From a psychoanalytic perspective, this objectification of alienation, its materialisation in a commodity, unveils a major feature of capitalism, namely that it places the subject in the position of the object that satisfies the Other’s demand for production, the object that is consumed by the Other for the extraction of surplus-object - this, precisely, is Lacan’s definition of perversion. As labour-power, a commodity consumed for the production of value, the subject is deprived of its subjective position. Commodification of labour means as much as imposing a perverse position on the subject, demanding from the subject to assume the position of the object of the Other’s jouissance. The main achievement of Marx’s labour theory of value consisted in the fact that it reclaimed the subjects position, hence reintroducing the position of the subject in the commodity world and abolishing another imposed fantasy, according to which capital is the true subject of the valorisation process.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="57" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#57">中</a>At this point we can add another remark regarding Marx’s labour theory of value, for which we hear that it lost its importance in times of financialisation and proliferation of new technologies. Such declarations risk blurring the difference between the political-economic labour theory (Smith and Ricardo) and its Marxian reformulation. The reason why Marx’s theory of value preserves the predicate ‘labour’ is not so much in the simplistic idea, according to which labour would be the central economic category and the privileged source of value. This is what a certain branch of classical political economy seemed to have claimed - and it was wrong. Rather, the main achievement of Marx’s theory of value concerns the fact that it recognises in labour the process, the analysis of which demonstrates that the source of value lies in inequality, exploitation and hence in social non-relation. However, in order to think the source of value rigorously we also need to acknowledge the participation of all the fetishist fantasies in this process - and this is another main achievement of Marx’s labour theory of value. The logic of value can only be thoroughly thought in parallel with an elaborate logic of fantasy. The labour theory of value thus becomes a component of a critical science, which repeatedly evolves around the inter-dependency of exploitation and mystification of exploitation, which both reach their peak in the fetishisation of capitalist abstractions. Marx’s labour theory has never been more theoretically urgent and more practically relevant than in today’s financial capitalism.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="58" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#58">中</a>Unconscious labour and abstract labour both lack concrete personification and embodiment, since their materiality consists in labour-power, which the discursive apparatus isolates in the living body and which the signifier or value represents independently from the relation to the signified. Because of this lack of concrete embodiment, Marx and Freud produced two ‘fetishisations’, that is, they forced two social personifications of abstract and unconscious labour. Marx could only invent the social symptom by fetishising the proletariat and the industrial reserve army as the point where the contradictions of the capitalist structure become empirical. This, of course, entails the misunderstanding that Marx’s critique descends from the realm of metaphysical abstractions to the concrete analysis of social conditions and to concrete men and women. The fetishisation in question maybe repeats the very same operation as commodity fetishism, but it articulates something that one might call Marx’s hypothesis: the individual who is affected by capitalism is the same as the one who constitutes the subject of value. This clearly inverts the fetishist hypothesis, according to which the subject of capitalism is capital itself. The sameness of the industrial proletariat and of the subject of value implies that the industrial labourer, in a given historic moment, the industrial revolution, embodies the split in the subject of labour and the alienation introduced by the capitalist organisation of production. Their hypothetical sameness does not contradict the fact that the subject of value designates the radical alienation of the individual that embodies it.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="59" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#59">中</a>For Freud, the same privilege, equally in the given historical moment, comes to the hysteric, who from Studies on Hysteria (1895) onward assumes the same function as Marx’s proletariat. The hysteric does not merely embody the symptom; she is the epistemological and the social symptom, e.g., for medical knowledge, which sees in her either a pseudo-illness, simulation and hypochondria, or an inexplicable enigma, around which an entire spectacle is organised: Charcot’s presentations of cases in the Parisian hospital La Salpêtrière had the status of theatre performances and attracted not only other scientists but also the lay public. In the nineteenth century, hysteria was the limit of scientific discourse, the point where the primacy of medical knowledge was suspended because the causes of the hysteric symptom cannot be traced back to anatomical origins solely. It was only Freud, who succeeded in theorising the hysteric as a social symptom, which on the epistemological level introduced a shift from the paradigm of the ‘medical gaze’ to the paradigm of the ‘analytic ear’, in other words, from the primacy of vision and observation to the primacy of speech and listening, and finally, from vulgar materialism to critical materialism. The hysteric is, indeed, Freud’s proletarian.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="60" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#60">中</a>The notion of dream work is supposed to explain the logical mechanism of fulfilment and the structure of desire. The question that occupies Freud is why does the unconscious need to work on a detour of displacements and condensations, censorship and deformations, in order to reach satisfaction. Why can there be no unmasked and undistorted satisfaction? In order to answer this question, Freud makes the hypothesis that the relation between unconscious desire and the demands of reality involves a contradiction. Due to this contradiction, the dream work produces double conditions for the satisfaction of desire, whereby the split in commodity form serves as the most comfortable means by which to overcome the contradiction between desire and reality. In the apparent satisfaction, an ‘other satisfaction’ begins to show. This internally double satisfaction is reached through the manipulation of the day’s remains, the material that accumulates on the borders of consciousness, in the preconscious, this grey zone between consciousness and the unconscious. In this intermediate space we come across wishes that can still be consciously formulated. For this reason, one could reproach Freud insofar as his analysis of dream samples exaggerates their meaning. The discussed cases only contain fulfilments of banal, simple and naive desires. Freud’s dream of Irma’s injection, this crown example that is supposed to demonstrate the revolutionary character of his discoveries, unveils his attempts to shirk responsibility for the failed treatment of his hysteric patient. Children’s dreams, another example that confirms the wish-fulfilment theory, are only concerned with concrete objects (sweets, toys and so on). Almost all examples seem to be badly chosen and speak against the reality of the ‘other satisfaction’. They leave the impression that the desire in question is simply preconscious, temporarily dropped out of consciousness and attention but did not change its character in any way. It still aims at the same concrete object and remains intertwined with the content of the day’s remains. And most importantly, at least for Freud’s critics, there is absolutely no trace of sexuality, not to speak of infantile sexuality, and there is no reason to complicate the matter with repression and censorship.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="61" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#61">中</a>Freud anticipates precisely such criticisms when he writes: ‘It will then appear as though the conscious wish alone has been realised in the dream’, a concrete satisfaction that assumed a hallucinatory and performative form. The emphasis is on the appearance that pushes a certain type of satisfaction into the foreground. This appearance is the same as the one that unites both aspects of the commodity and masks the structural gap between use-value and exchange-value. In accordance with this, the dream form implies two satisfactions, of which one depends on its apparent immediate meaning and another on its linguistic value. The move from quality to quantity entails a shift in the object form. Lacan’s object a, the object of desire, is an object without qualities that presupposes the autonomy of value. Thereby it becomes clear that the discovery of this object is possible only under the condition of the commodity form in the universe of capitalism and modern science. Before the object of desire appears either as an unattainable transcendent Thing (das Ding that Lacan discusses in reference to the status of the Lady in the medieval courtly love) or as an immanent agalma (like in the transference relation between Socrates and Alcibiades in Plato’s Symposium). The object a, neither transcendent nor immanent, remains unthinkable outside modernity and is so to speak a modern invention, a consequence of the foundation of science on universal mathematisation and of the social relations on quantification and mass production.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="62" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#62">中</a>The hallucinatory fulfilment in dreams shows that the satisfaction was postponed and that the fulfilment presupposes a renunciation of immediate satisfaction, as in the case of children’s dreams. The postponement exposes a shift within satisfaction, which remains invisible in the wish-fulfilment and in relation to which the immediacy of wish relates as a mask. In other words, the manifestation of desire is always mediated through the apparent immediacy of wish. Desire parasites the use-value of objects. We can already notice that the relation between the conscious and the unconscious ‘wish’ is also inscribed into language: the pair ‘wish-desire’ perfectly corresponds with ‘work-labour’, just as the production of use-value and the production of value overlap with satisfaction and the other satisfaction. Wish can still be attributed to consciousness because its object is concrete, whereas desire appears to be without an object, as long as it is not associated with the quantitative and abstract character of the commodity form. Freud’s dream analyses simply attempt to demonstrate that the ‘unconscious wish’ does have an object because it finds satisfaction in the surplus produced through the manipulation of psychic material. The name of this object is also at hand - it is simply Lust, pleasure. Although Freud will soon discover that the status of this unconsciously produced pleasure is more problematic than it seems.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="63" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#63">中</a>After pointing out the appearance that masks the other satisfaction, Freud finally introduces the already mentioned economic comparison, which should illustrate the nature of the unconscious desire and make his concept of the unconscious more understandable. ‘I am now in position to give a sharp description’ - sharp because the appearance needs to be put back into focus in order to make desire present - ‘of the part played in dreams by unconscious wish’. He admits that there are dreams in which the stimulation comes from the day’s remains, hence from use-value, although this trigger is not enough for the dream formation. For instance, in Freud’s dream of Irma’s injection, his concern about the patients state was not enough. He then has recourse to the comparison of unconscious production with capitalist production that is worth repeating here:<span class="quote"><a id="64" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#64">中</a>The motive force, which the dream required, had to be provided by a wish; it was the business of the worry to get hold of a wish to act as the motive force of the dream. The position may be explained by an analogy. A daytime thought may very well play the part of entrepreneur for a dream; but the entrepreneur, who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to carry it out, can do nothing without the capital; he needs a capitalist who can afford the outlay, and the capitalist who provides the psychical outlay for the dream is invariably and indisputably, whatever maybe the thoughts of the previous day, a wish from the unconscious.</span><a id="65" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#65">中</a>Freud does not say what the Freudo-Marxists will claim later, that the unconscious explains capitalism; he states precisely the opposite: it is capitalism that elucidates the unconscious. The unconscious discovered in the Interpretation of Dreams is nothing other than the capitalist unconscious, the intertwining of unconscious satisfaction with the structure and the logic of the capitalist mode of production.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="66" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#66">中</a>Freud seems to make a similar move as Saussure. The reference to the capitalist and the entrepreneur (homo oeconomicus) makes the entire comparison sound more like ‘Freud with Smith’ rather than ‘Freud with Marx’. According to classical economic liberalism, the encounter between the capitalist and the labourer takes place in a free space of equal opportunities and is actualised through the act of exchange: money for commodity, one abstraction for another. The same encounter echoes in the unconscious: psychic energy is exchanged for the idea contained in the day’s residues. We can mention in passing that in one of his later texts Freud will describe the ‘psychic energy’, in the meantime renamed libido, as the standard ‘currency’ of psychic life. Everything can be translated into this mental general equivalent. The situation is nevertheless more complex than Freud’s comparisons seem to suggest. Unconscious labour is incompatible with homo oeconomicus, so it does not even appear in the comparison. However, the discussion of dreams leaves no doubt that the ‘only essential thing in dreams is the dream-work that has influenced the thought-material’? In Freud’s example, the association of the capitalist with the ‘wish from the unconscious’ is more crucial because it exposes an essential feature of the capitalist. Unlike the entrepreneur, who conserves the reference to the economic subject of cognition, the capitalist is identified with decentralised desire, which brings the comparison closer to Marx’s description of the capitalist as the personification of the impersonal and systemic imperative of constant growth and of profit-making. Freud also mentions other possible relations between the capitalist and the entrepreneur, from their complete difference, their lesser or greater overlapping, to situations in which several entrepreneurs address the same capitalist or several capitalists support the same entrepreneur. These combinations do not change anything in the underlying relation itself, although they do blur the fact that Freud constantly speaks of unconscious desire in the singular. There is no multiplicity of desires, in contrast to wishes, but one single unconscious desire, which comes down to one insatiable imperative. It also becomes apparent that this singular desire does not imply a subject: desire is precisely a ‘process without a subject’.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="67" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#67">中</a>Rather than explaining unconscious production, the comparison focuses on the appearance. The actual complication emerges when the labour theory shows that the unconscious is split between desire and labour. This double character contains a further aspect that distinguishes the Freudian notion from other possible conceptions. First, the unconscious is placed in a relation of dependency on the social structure. Then this mark is interpreted as a contradiction, the constitutive split of One into Two that Freud already pushed into the foreground in his early work through the notion of the ‘psychic conflict’. When Freud applies the social link between the capitalist and the labourer to the unconscious, he literally repeats Marx’s move in Capital, where they are both progressively detached from the psychological personages, describing processes rather than persons. The unconscious desire shows that the capitalist enters the stage as an anomaly in the field of mastery: a headless master.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="68" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#68">中</a>As already mentioned, Freud classifies the dream work by four basic operations. His analysis shows that these operations take place on two different levels. The ground level is the condensation work and the displacement work: the two fundamental aspects of unconscious labour that match the two main linguistic operations, metaphor and metonymy. Freud privileged these processes in another comparison with social labour: ‘Dream displacement and dream condensation are the two skilled workers [Werkmeister] to whose activity we may in essence ascribe the form assumed by dreams’. The processes appear as a form of knowledge: savoir faire, knowledge without reflection, unknown knowledge. This is what differentiates the unconscious labourer from the entrepreneur, who still remains in the paradigm of the subject of cognition, for which political economy assumes that it possesses knowledge both of his or her inner interests and of the external market relations.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="69" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#69">中</a>The other two operations, consideration of representability and secondary elaboration, appear as a repetition of condensation and displacement within the imaginary. Freud points out that this imaginary dimension is not reducible visualisation, when during his discussion of secondary elaboration he evokes the very same lines in Heine that will three decades later serve him in his critique of Weltanschauung:<span class="quote"><a id="70" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#70">中</a>The thing that distinguishes and at the same time reveals this part of the dream-work is its purpose. This function behaves in the manner, which the poet maliciously ascribes to philosophers: it fills up the gaps in the dream-structure with shreds and patches. As a result of its efforts, the dream loses its appearance of absurdity and disconnectedness and approximates to the model of an intelligible experience. But its efforts are not always crowned with success.</span><a id="71" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#71">中</a>The second stage of dream formation is related to this totalisation. Here the dream receives consistency and narration, which makes it comparable to the ‘intellectual construction’ of worldviews and even more so with the use-value of commodities. But the tendency of labour is not necessarily the same as in metaphor and metonymy, since it tries to fill the gap between use-value and exchange-value, between meaning and value of the unconscious formation. Freud underlines this minimal discrepancy by indicating that the task of secondary elaboration is to abolish the appearance of absurdity, which becomes striking once the ‘value of jouissance’ (as Lacan translates exchange-value in Seminar XIV) is entirely separated from meaning. On the level of secondary elaboration and the consideration of representability, the value of dreams appears in their meaning: jouissance assumes the form of joui-sens (enjoyed meaning, to refer to another Lacanian wordplay).</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="72" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#72">中</a>When Lacan replaced Saussure with Marx, he directed psychoanalysis back to the figure of the unconscious labourer and thereby radicalised the implications of his own introduction of the subject. This orientation is most lucidly formulated in Television, where Lacan leaves no doubt that psychoanalysis and the critique of political economy come across the same subject:<span class="quote"><a id="73" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#73">中</a>Does the unconscious imply that it be listened to? To my mind, yes. But this surely does not imply that, without the discourse through which it ex-sists, one judges it as knowledge that does not think, or calculate, or judge-which doesn’t prevent it from being at work (as in dreams, for instance). Lets say that it is the ideal worker, the one Marx made the flower of capitalist economy in the hope of seeing him takeover the discourse of the master; which, in effect, is what happened, although in an unexpected form. There are surprises in these matters of discourse, and that is, indeed, the point of the unconscious [le fait de l’inconscient].</span><a id="74" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#74">中</a>That the unconscious implies listening does not make psychoanalysis a dialogue in which it would regress back to some abstract and ideal communicative model, as various forms of psychologies and psychotherapies have done. What is at stake is that the truth regains the power of speech. The subjective manifestations of its speech are inhibitions, symptoms and anxieties that the discourse causes in the body. The speaking truth, the power of truth to be more than mere facticity or truth-value, is the main terrain where psychoanalysis encounters Marxism and the figure of the labourer is the privileged conceptual embodiment of this encounter. Practically all of Lacan’s texts from 1969 onwards address this intertwining of the unconscious subject and the capitalist labourer, thereby indicating that the transformation of the subject that psychoanalysis strives to produce in its praxis stands in immediate continuity with the political question of social change. It is not surprising that Television defines one of the psychoanalytic goals as the ‘way out of capitalist discourse’, to which Lacan adds that it ‘will not constitute progress, if it happens only for some’. In political matters, psychoanalysis envisages the same universalism as Marxist politics.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="75" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#75">中</a>Lacan condenses Freud’s analysis of the relation between unconscious desire, dream work and capitalism by speaking of the ideal labourer, an expression that explores the flip side of the homology between unconscious production and capitalist production. The ideal labourer is not the same as the subject of alienation. It stands for the multiplicity of operations that take place among the signifiers, to which a decentralised form of knowledge can be attributed. The ideal labourer does not know itself as a form of knowledge, but this does not prevent it from accomplishing its task. The subject of labour only enters the stage as far as the unconscious does not merely imply labour but also listening, the enunciation of truth that sabotages the automatism of unconscious knowledge, of knowledge as ‘means of jouissance’, that is, as means of production. The subject of the unconscious, by contrast, is a disturbance in the regime of knowledge, an anomaly that articulates its enunciation through the symptom: ‘There is only one social symptom - each individual is really a proletarian, that is it has no discourse of which to make a social link, in other words, a semblant’. The real status of each individual as subject in the capitalist mode of production coincides with what Marx strives to address through the proletariat. The proletarian is ‘the subject as a response of the real’. Here we again encounter the echo of Marx’s subject-hypothesis that orthodox Marxism later abolished through the identification of the proletariat with the subject of knowledge. To paraphrase Hegel, the worldview Marxism theorised the proletarian merely as substance (class-consciousness) and no longer as subject (labour-power). Instead of transforming the capitalist subject, class-consciousness transformed the ideal labourer, making of its unknown knowledge a reflected ‘scientific’ knowledge. This, too, is the surprise that Lacan alludes to in Television: the historical and the structural development goes from the master’s discourse, whose modern version is capitalism before the second industrial revolution, to the university discourse in post-industrial capitalism, where it is precisely knowledge, hence the ideal labourer, that assumes the position of the master. The same structural shift was accomplished in the Soviet Union, where the knowledge of the Party, the historic embodiment of the proletarian class-consciousness, became the privileged discursive agent.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="76" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#76">中</a>Lacan’s conclusion is thus: the proletarian is the subject of the unconscious. Marx and Freud undoubtedly placed their wager on the revolutionary potential of this figure. For Marx, the political task of the industrial proletariat consists in its realisation, that is, its self-abolition through the abolition of labour-power, which would produce a new social link and a new figure of subjectivity. Freud, too, thought that the discovery of the unconscious would initiate a transformation that is both epistemological and social. His critiques of religion in The Future of an Illusion, of politics in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, and of capitalism in Civilisation and Its Discontents were directed against the social structures that are rooted in the relations of domination. The revolutionary potential of the subject of psychoanalysis was supposed to demonstrate that the ego is not a master in his own household, and thereby to overthrow the ‘I-cracy’ (Lacan) that marked the modern philosophies of consciousness and on which economic liberalism grounded its homo oeconomicus.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="77" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#77">中</a>Lacan clearly assumes a more realistic position and detects the political failure of Marxism and Freudianism. The proletarian, this privileged figure of social and unconscious labour, did indeed accomplish a social and an epistemological revolution, but this revolution essentially took place in the relation between power and knowledge. The liberation of labour introduced a social system in which abstract knowledge assumed the position of the master. The ideal labourer meanwhile changed its appearance and turned into a figure of domination both in capitalism (the expert, the Eurocrat) and in Stalinism (the party bureaucrat). Marx in fact predicted the possibility of such a course of events. In the first volume of Capital, the capitalist transformation of labour is accomplished in the technological organisation of production, the inversion of the relation between the labourer and the machine. When Marx writes about the use of machines in capitalism, he thematises constantly the essential role of scientific knowledge in the progressive social implementation of capitalist abstractions. The importance of machines is not in their material presence but in the fact that they exemplify the productive nature of knowledge in capitalism, knowledge as a means of production and as a tool of modern power relations. For this reason, Marx assumes a reserved position towards the Luddite movement. His main concern was that they mistakenly saw the problem in machines themselves and not in the new social role of knowledge that these machines actualise in the production process. Their immediate attack on the machines could indeed be considered the flip side of the capitalist fetishisation of machines as the producers of surplus-value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="78" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#78">中</a>Lacan’s ideal labourer translates Freud’s skilled worker, condensation and displacement, the logical operations that do their labour, without knowing themselves as a form of knowledge. The designation of the ideal labourer as ‘knowledge that does not think, judge, or calculate’ immediately evokes a crucial passage from the Interpretation of Dreams, where Freud provides a condensed account of the dream work from the viewpoint of secondary elaboration and draws the following conclusion:<span class="quote"><a id="79" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#79">中</a>Two separate functions may be distinguished in mental activity during the construction of a dream: the production of the dream-thoughts, and their transformation into the content of the dream ... However many interesting and puzzling questions the dream-thoughts may involve, such questions have, after all, no special relation to dreams and do not call for treatment among the problems of dreams. On the other hand, the second function of mental activity during dream construction, the transformation of the unconscious thoughts into the content of the dream, is peculiar to dream-life and characteristic of it. This dream-work proper diverges further from our picture of waking thought than has been supposed even by the most determined depreciator of psychical functioning during the formation of dreams. The dream-work is not simply more careless, more irrational, more forgetful and more incomplete than waking thought; it is completely different from it qualitatively and for that reason not immediately comparable with it. It does not think, calculate or judge in any way at all; it restricts itself to giving things a new form.</span><a id="80" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#80">中</a>The double character of unconscious labour is striking, but the actual object of dream work is the form and not the content, the very same form that supports the satisfaction of unconscious desire. The transformation of  preconscious material involves a production of appearance that will not only lead to the satisfaction of desire but will literally mask desire in a wish. Dream work essentially consists in creating the conditions for this masking, which also codifies other satisfaction into satisfaction, exchange-value into use-value, and finally jouissance into pleasure. ‘Dreams are wish-fulflments’ is therefore anything but an innocent statement.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="81" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#81">中</a>The supposedly enigmatic character of dreams is of no particular interest to Freud. He explains it as an effect of the form of the dream itself. This is why psychoanalysis does not interpret dreams by giving them meaning. The hermeneutic strategy would focus on the content and in doing so overlook the mechanism of the dream production, the labour and the subject of labour. Thereby it would fetishise dreams by attributing them a deeper meaning. It is interesting to observe how Freud rejects the appearance of enigma and the postulate of irrationality in the procedures of the dream. He implicitly refers to the difference between concrete and abstract labour: dreams display the pure form of rationality because the labour that produces them is stripped of positive qualities like thinking, calculating and judging, qualities that still define the subject of cognition. Because the dream work merely accomplishes its task, it is careful, correct, unforceful, and thus ideal: labour without qualities.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="82" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#82">中</a>Something nevertheless goes wrong in this dream factory, and this is yet another aspect of surprise that the unconscious introduces into discourse. Freud soon discovered that not all dreams confirm the general scenario of wish-fulfilment. He came across dreams that reproduced traumatic experiences, for instance those reported by war neurotics or the sexually abused; and finally there is the famous dream of the burning child that Freud initially took as an example of wish-fulfilment. By constantly returning to a traumatic experience - war, abuse, death and so on -these dreams unveil the compulsion to repeat. With this discovery, traumatic neurosis turns out to be the collateral damage of capitalism. Cultural discontent will immediately become the main theme of Freud’s critique of modern culture. The dreams that do not confirm the general dispositif bear the character of awakening, sabotaging the production of jouissance. In this respect the unconscious is not reducible to one single discursive structure. It already raises the question of its exit.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="83" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#83">中</a>When Lacan reaffirmed the linguistic structure of the unconscious, he introduced the term that brings together Marx and Freud’s analysis of labour. This is the function of ca parle, it speaks. The psychoanalytic intervention operates on three levels: thinking, working and speaking. Discussions of psychoanalysis often mention that Freud’s invention consisted in the fact that he listened to the speech of his hysteric patients, who revealed to him the secret of the unconscious: the hysteric symptom speaks and by speaking enunciates the truth of the discourse that determines it. This enunciation already inhibits the mechanism of satisfaction. In this psychoanalysis most directly coincides with Marx’s discovery that in labour, too, an enunciation takes place, which articulates the truth of the capitalist relations of production. This is where Marx’s invention of the social symptom gains its full weight for psychoanalysis. The symptom is the encounter of the proletarian and the subject of the unconscious, of the labourer and the speaking being.</p>
	<h2 id="part_3"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">L</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">USTGEWINN</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent:0"><a id="84" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#84">中</a>Only four years after the publication of the Interpretation of Dreams, its lessons found a further development in the elaboration of the libidinal unconscious. In 1905, Freud published two apparently unrelated books, Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious and Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. While the book on jokes continues the direction of the Interpretation of Dreams, both method- and style-wise, the Three Essays replace the reference to language with the body, and the structural analysis of satisfaction with the theory of sexual development. The press welcomed the first book, while the discussion of sexuality encountered resistance and discontent. Despite apparent differences, the two works nevertheless meet in the introduction of the Freudian notion of jouissance, condensed in the expression Lustgewinn, pleasure gain or pleasure profit, in which it is not difficult to recognise the conceptual mediator between Lacan’s surplus-jouissance and Marx’s surplus-value. With this notion, Freud finally names the object of the unconscious production and the object that satisfies the unconscious tendency. Both works also intersect in that they introduce the tendency that will henceforth occupy Freud’s theoretical work and call for the elaboration of a metapsychology: the drive and its topological paradoxes. Lustgewinn and the move towards Trieblehre, the theory of the drive, overcame the opposition between structure and anatomy, situating psychoanalysis in the grey zone their intersection. Freud thereby inaugurated the direction that Lacan came back to when defining the signifier as an apparatus of jouissance.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="85" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#85">中</a>Freud from the very outset approached the modus operandi of the mental apparatus through economic metaphors. As his theories became more complex, this economic reality, too, displayed its antagonistic features more and more, one of them being the tendency of the unconscious production towards the absolutisation of the production of jouissance. ‘Our mental activities’, writes Freud in one of his later texts, ‘pursue either a useful aim or an immediate pleasure gain’, again in accordance with the distinction between use-value and exchange-value. The analysis of dreams has already shown that the satisfaction of desire does not address the use-value of the day residues but aims at the value of jouissance they obtain through the dream work, placing unconscious labour in equivocity with unconscious desire. The term Lustgewinn defines pleasure as surplus, hence as something that the mental activities reach beside their tendency to usefulness. Seen from the perspective of use-value and of the need it presupposes, pleasure appears as an affection that accompanies the abolition of a bodily stimulus and the decrease of a tension. From the viewpoint of value, however, pleasure is no longer a more or less accidental side effect but the object of satisfaction. As such, Lustgewinn does not relate to any quality, which also implies that it has no corresponding need. The shift from usefulness to uselessness that directs the Freudian concept of Lust explains why Lacan translated the German term with ‘jouissance’ and not ‘pleasure’. From the very outset it is clear that a fundamental subversion is at stake in Lustgewinn, which is not an insignificant side effect of satisfaction. The satisfaction of needs is always-already parasitised, colonised and subverted by the satisfaction of unconscious tendencies (desire and drive), whose existence depends on the autonomy of the signifier and of value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="86" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#86">中</a>The connection of pleasure with use-value, the definition of commodity as what satisfies a need and serves as a source of pleasure is also Marx’s point of departure, where different types or qualities of needs are equated in the following way:<span class="quote"><a id="87" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#87">中</a>The commodity is, first of all, an external object, a thing which through its qualities satisfies human needs of whatever kind. The nature of such needs, whether they arise, for example, from the stomach or from fantasy, makes no difference. Nor does it matter here how the object satisfies these needs, whether directly as a means of subsistence, i. e. , an object of consumption, or indirectly as a means of production.</span><a id="88" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#88">中</a>Hasty psychoanalytic readings will conclude that Marx begins his analysis of commodity form by foreclosing the dimension of desire and hence of the subject because he simply equates the immediate bodily needs and the needs that are symbolically mediated and in the last instance rooted in fantasy - hence needs and desires in the strict sense. However, this is precisely what Marx does not do. By exposing the double character of commodities, he introduces the equivocity between both regimes of value and the tendencies of satisfaction, which will in the end relativise the non-fantasmatic status of need and use-value. Marx introduces his developments with the claim that, in order to analyse the qualitative aspect of commodity, we first need to abolish the division of immediate and mediated satisfaction, on the one hand, and physiological and psychological satisfaction, on the other. The commodity form becomes the universal source of pleasure: in the modern universe ‘there are only commodity pleasures’; there is thus one single satisfaction, which is nevertheless internally complicated due to the split of commodity between ‘qualities without matter’ and ‘matter without qualities’, to repeat Milner. If even fantasies are marked by use-value, the inverse is no less true, exchange-value colonises physiological or psychological needs. The complication envisaged by Marx is thus apparent. In order to understand any satisfaction whatsoever, one first needs to analyse the structure of commodity. A useless object such as a diamond is evidently fetishised, but this fetishist relation is accompanied by a fantasmatic need. Desire traverses the need and is supported by the fantasmatic screen of usefulness. The simultaneity of the satisfaction of needs and the other satisfaction (of desire and drive) unveils the coupling of two heterogeneities in a unified object, one of the functions of fantasy being precisely to link the non-linkable. Through this fantasmatic link, the use-value and the exchange-value contaminate each other and make the object in question sehr vertrackt, as Marx writes, complicated, fuzzy and even insane.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="89" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#89">中</a>When Marx equates the physiological need (stomach) with the intellectual need (fantasy), he indicates that the need should not be understood as quasi-natural. With need we already entered the discursive field, and need cannot be exactly isolated from its dialectical relation with demand and desire. There are no innocent needs, the satisfaction of which would not be structurally determined. Going back to Freud, his distinction between usefulness and pleasure shows that the satisfaction of needs could only cause pleasure as a side effect and that this side contains no pleasure-gain. Usefulness and need remain in the perspective of what Freud describes as the reduction of tension, or the abolition of bodily affection, which still suggests that the mental apparatus contains an essentially self-regulatory tendency towards homeostasis, the Aristotelian right measure. In order to speak of pleasure-gain, a third term must stand between need and satisfaction: discourse (social link, difference). There is no jouissance without discourse, and there is no other jouissance than a discursive one. Lacan emphasises this in the aforementioned translation of exchange-value with the value of jouissance. From the viewpoint of discourse, needs and their satisfactions are always-already stained with the other satisfaction that is tied to the libidinal body and to the materiality of the signifier. The concreteness of the object, whose qualities are supposed to cause pleasure, fades, and what counts is only the ‘abstract’ object, which finally inverses the relation between pleasure and tension. This is where the structure of the mental apparatus approaches the capitalist economic model. In the other satisfaction, tension is no longer reduced but increased. The satisfaction of needs is of minor importance and is entirely integrated in the other satisfaction, as its internal, quasi-fictional moment. The unconscious tendency and the capitalist drive for self-valorisation first and foremost demand a constant production of surplus and a constant growth in tension. This is one of the main features of the Freudian notion of the drive, which demands a thorough re-elaboration of the functioning of the mental apparatus and the abolition of the initial homeostatic model.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="90" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#90">中</a>The dialectic of value shows that use-value relates to exchange-value in a similar way as appearance to logic. Freud will come to an astonishingly similar conclusion: ‘What is useful is itself (as is well known) only a circuitous path to pleasurable satisfaction.’ Dreams fall into this category, whereby Freud reminds his reader that it would be wrong to consider dreaming an activity that merely concludes and resolves the day’s preoccupations in a hallucinatory (performative) way: ‘That is the business of preconscious thought. Useful work of this kind is as remote from dreams as is any intention of conveying information to another person.’ Dreams minimise the usefulness and the referentiality of the signifier. Instead, they intensify its autonomy and causality. In this respect, capitalism, too, is an eternal dream, or rather a perpetuated nightmare, from which it appears impossible to wake up.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="91" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#91">中</a>Once desire and the drive enter the picture, every satisfaction of needs seems problematic: ‘All the needs of speaking beings are contaminated by the fact of being involved in an other satisfaction that they may not live up to.’ The commodity form is the privileged materialisation of this distortion, and even when Marx discussed the developed form of this contamination, fictitious capital, where the creation of value out of value (M - M’) becomes the rule of production, he nevertheless repeated the critical gesture from the first volume, according to which the self-engendering appearance of capital is grounded in the fetishist fantasy of direct overlapping of quality and value. Freud took the same direction in his move beyond the pleasure principle, from the homeostatic to the conflictual conception of the psychic apparatus, where jouissance appears to be deprived of all referentiality and becomes its own subject. But it would be wrong to conclude that in the libidinal unconscious the negative subject of the signifier is abolished, that the unconscious labourer vanishes, or that the repressed unconscious tendency becomes its own productive labourer. This would be fetishisation of jouissance, homologous to the fetishisation of financial abstractions.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="92" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#92">中</a>Freud discovered in the production of pleasure-gain a transformation of pleasure. No satisfaction of needs can produce pleasure as profit because the pleasure that accompanies the satisfaction of needs merely signals the re-establishment of the supposedly homeostatic order that turns out to be fictional from the viewpoint of the other satisfaction. The keyword here is homeostasis, which Freud in 1905 still believed determined the overall functioning of the mental apparatus. Lustgewinn is the first sign that the homeostasis of the pleasure principle is mere fiction. Nevertheless it demonstrates that no satisfaction of needs can produce more pleasure, just as no surplus-value can logically follow from the circulation ( C - M - C). Surplus-jouissance, the connection of pleasure with profitmaking, does not simply undermine the supposedly homeostatic character of the pleasure principle; it shows that the homeostasis is a necessary fiction, which structures and supports unconscious production, just as the imaginary achievement of worldview mechanisms consisted in providing an enclosed whole, without cracks in its overall construction. Lustgewinn is Freud’s first conceptual confrontation with what will later be situated beyond the pleasure principle, the compulsion to repeat, and what will introduce the psychoanalytic equivalent to the circulation (M - C - M’).</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="93" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#93">中</a>The introduction of Lustgewinn retroactively explained the status of pleasure and satisfaction in the Interpretation of Dreams, but it also complicates the matter because unconscious desire was replaced by the drive. In both cases, the surplus-object functions differently. On the level of desire, it appears as lack, absence and negativity. This appearance is linked to the metonymic structure, which makes the object shift from one concrete embodiment to another. Wajcman extensively elaborated this logical articulation in the case of the collector and the miser. The structure of collection remains open because the object ofcollecting is notidentical to the collected objects. No object is the object that would totalise the collection, thereby bringing about the satisfaction of desire. Another case is provided by Freud’s dream analysis, where the reality of unconscious desire depends on the association of apparently disparate elements. Desire coincides with its own interpretation, the combination of the material from the day’s remains and with the codification of its insistence. One way to meet the surplus is thus through the metonymic movement, where the encounter with the object always fails: no object is the object of desire, and, consequently, the surplus is always confronted in the form of a lack. For the unconscious desire, the surplus is never enough surplus; it cannot be associated with one object alone. It is only in relation to the drive that the surplus appears positive. Instead of the metonymic shifting and withdrawing of the object, the drive is structured through circulation and repetition.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="94" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#94">中</a>The paradoxes of the drive were not an unknown for Marx, whose manuscripts already contained the connection between the structure of the drive, the abstract nature of the general equivalent and the production of surplus-value:<span class="quote"><a id="95" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#95">中</a>Money is therefore not only an object, but is the object of greed . . . Greed as such, as a particular form of the drive, i.e., as distinct from the craving for a particular kind of wealth, e.g., for clothes, weapons, jewels, women, wine, etc. is possible only when general wealth, wealth as such, has become individualised in a particular thing, i.e. , as soon as money is posited in its third quality. Money is therefore not only the object but also the fountainhead of greed. The mania for possessions is possible without money; but greed itself is the product of a definite social development, not natural, as opposed to historical.</span><a id="96" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#96">中</a>The drive is intimately linked to the double status of the general equivalent - as a means of exchange and as a particular use-value that totalises the universe of objects. Unlike desire, whose object is not yet identified with a particular embodiment and therefore supports the structure of metonymy, the drive presupposes the paradox of concrete universality, what the general equivalent is supposed to be. The desire for the object (wealth) thus accumulates a collection of objects that embody value - it focuses on the objects of value and not on value as object. The drive, on the other hand, is fixated on the object, the general equivalent, which due to its paradoxical status - being both singular and universal, a commodity and a Commodity in which all commodities are reflected supports the infinitisation of satisfaction, which is to say, its impossibility and endless perpetuation. The capitalist drive for self-valorisation is an unsatisfiable demand, to which no labour can live up to. Marx also made an important point when he detached the notion of the drive from its biological or physiological connotation. He entirely conditioned it with the social existence of the general equivalent and with historical development. The capitalist drive is therefore not the only possible drive. There is something like a history of the drive, a historical transformation of fixations, which alters the social articulation of the drive together with the function of the general equivalent in the predominant mode of production. In Plato and Aristotle, the problem of the drive is indicated, although in the universe of antiquity this problem was not the same as in the capitalist universe, where the mode of production is based on the mathematisation of surplus-value and on the unleashing of the demand for self-valorisation in the form of fictitious capital. The old spirit of usury is by far no embryonic form of the modern spirit of capitalism, even if both can be explained through the existence of the general equivalent. Let us recall another crucial passage from the Grundrisse:<span class="quote"><a id="97" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#97">中</a>Hunger is hunger, but the hunger gratified by cooked meat eaten with a knife and fork is a different hunger from that which bolts down raw meat with the aid of hand, nail and tooth. Production thus produces not only the object but also the manner of consumption, not only objectively but also subjectively. Production thus creates the consumer. Production not only supplies a material for the need, but it also supplies a need for the material.</span><a id="98" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#98">中</a>Marx again aims at the historical and the social transformation of the drive, leaving no doubt that the placement of the drive at the intersection of presumably natural need and its cultural articulation can be considered a predecessor of the psychoanalytic notion, for the Freudian notion of the drive is not the hunger that swallows raw meat but the hunger that reaches satisfaction through the montage of cooked meat, cutlery and table manners. Indeed, Lacan brought this to a crucial point when he compared the drive to a surrealist collage, underlining that the montage of the heterogeneous elements contains a differentiation between the aim and the goal, so again between use-value and exchange-value.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="99" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#99">中</a>Let us now pass over to Freud’s discovery of surplus-jouissance in his analyses of jokes and humour. In Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious, the production of surplus is discussed in the social context. Freud emphasises this at the very beginning when he justifies the fact that, after already writing on dreams and failed actions, he dedicated another scientific study to an apparently marginal and insignificant object. The scientific discussion of jokes can be justified by the fact that a ‘new joke acts almost like an event of universal interest’; a joke is never merely a joke - it is a social process’. It codifies nothing less than the relation between the unconscious and the social link. Unlike dreams, which appear to be a private activity of the dreamer and where the presence of social mechanisms is harder to demonstrate (after all the function of dreams is to preserve sleep, the withdrawal from the social), jokes immediately point towards a social framework; they reveal the structure of social relations and the social economy of surplus-jouissance.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="100" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#100">中</a>The matter is, of course, more complicated. It is not that the unconscious is more social in jokes than in dreams, and that one changes the register of the individual unconscious for the social unconscious. On the contrary, for Freud, dreams and jokes present two cases of the same discursive condition. The discussion of jokes in no respect shifts from the individual to the social; instead, it demonstrates that the unconscious stands beyond the division between interiority and exteriority, individuality and society, private and public. If dreams revealed the inscription of the social link into the unconscious, jokes demonstrate the manifestation of the unconscious in the social link, two sides of the causality of the signifier.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="101" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#101">中</a>The analysis of jokes is introduced with the note that their character is not linked to a specific thought but to their form of expression, wording (Wortlaut). The entire focus is on the role of equivocity, which actualises the split between meaning and value. The efficiency of jokes depends on how Witzarbeit, the unconscious labour in jokes, forms the word. Unconscious production is again directed by condensation and displacement, but in this case their combination reveals an economic paradox.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="102" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#102">中</a>Different joke techniques meet in a common strategy, which consists of the multiple use of the same material, the recycling of the given. Equivocity, double meaning or wordplay, combines different contexts in the same product. The multiple use of the same material characterises the non-metaphorical use of condensation: ‘play upon words is nothing other than a condensation without substitute-formation’. In this transformation of condensation, Freud encounters the economic tendency towards saving: ‘All these techniques are dominated by a tendency to compression, or rather to saving. It all seems to be a question of economy. In Hamlet’s words: ‘“Thrift, thrift, Horatio!”’ From this perspective, the unconscious labourer appears as the ideal saver, whose tendency to condensation is supposed to produce a surplus: save in order to create profit and to stabilise economic relations. Sounds rather familiar.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="103" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#103">中</a>The tendency towards saving is declared to be the general characteristic of joke techniques, although there is something economically inefficient in this form of saving, since the entire process is accompanied by displacement. In order to explain the apparent absurdity of unconscious saving, Freud recurs to the following economic comparison:<span class="quote"><a id="104" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#104">中</a>The economies made by the joke-technique do not greatly impress us. They may remind us, perhaps, of the way in which some housewives economise when they spend time and money on a journey to a distant market because vegetables are to be had there a few farthings cheaper. What does a joke save by its technique? The putting together of a few new words, which would mostly have emerged without any trouble. Instead of that, it has to take the trouble to search out the one word which covers the two thoughts. Indeed, it must often first transform one of the thoughts into an unusual form which will provide a basis for its combination with the second thought. Would it not have been simpler, easier, and, in fact, more economical to have expressed the two thoughts as they happened to come, even if this involved no common form of expression?Is not the economy in words uttered more than balanced by the expenditure on intellectual effort? And who saves by that? Who gains by it?</span><a id="105" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#105">中</a>Saving turns into spending and the unconscious appears as an ideal consumer. The problem is that metonymic movement creates long detours and actualises a tendency to spend. The combination of both operations, condensation and displacement, saving and spending, thus produces an apparent contradiction, an economic absurdity. Freud’s analysis shows that jokes generate a loss in order to reach pleasure-profit. The surplus is produced at the background of the interdependency between spending and saving, and the housewife metaphor is pertinent only in so far as it shows that saving should not be regarded as the ultimate goal of the process but as something that can as well be considered a form of spending, a production of surplus that differs from what would be the accumulation of savings. The appearance of saving masks that there is a different kind of production in the background. Similarly, the imperative of economic cuts and restrictions is the inevitable flip side of the imperative to produce surplus. The housewife example shows that the profit should not be attributed to the housewife but to the entire procedure. Economy can make profit because she is losing money in a seemingly rational economisation.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="106" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#106">中</a>This structural operation is deployed in the social dimension of jokes. Jokes ‘should not, after all, be described as pointless or aimless, since [they have] the unmistakable aim of evoking pleasure in [their] hearers’. They cause pleasure, and this feature entails a shift from usefulness to uselessness. At this point, things complicate for the same reason as in dreams. The pleasure in jokes is reached through detour and at the background of the preceding renunciation of pleasure: ‘If we do not require our mental apparatus at the moment for supplying one of our indispensable satisfactions, we allow it itself to work in the direction of pleasure and we seek to derive pleasure from its own activity.’ When the mental apparatus does not satisfy needs, it produces pleasure, but it is impossible to determine when one activity ceases and the other begins. Production needs to be associated with a problematic tendency, which opens up three possibilities: either the tendency is innocent (which is questionable in itself; why would it then be masked?), or jokes serve either a hostile or an obscene tendency (aggression or exposure). The procedure is marked by a libidinal investment that points back to the drive, this new object of study in connection to unconscious formations and, one could say, a new metaphor of the capitalist, the unconscious investor that has now replaced desire. Desire did not know what it wanted and has metonymically shifted from one object to another; the drive, however, ‘knows’ what it wants. It is fixated on the object.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="107" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#107">中</a>As an example in which the hostile and the obscene tendency are combined, Freud mentions smut, where the psychoanalytic gaze meets unconscious production and its object at its purest. This is also where the third person that supports the mechanism of jokes and reveals the importance of the social link in the production of jouissance finally enters the picture. Three persons condition the manifestation of an unconscious tendency: the narrator, the target of the joke, and the listener. Freud makes an important remark that the person who tells the joke is not the same as the person who enjoys its effects. The production of jouissance is outsourced to the side of the passive listener. It is tied to what is heard and to the combination of the aggressive and the obscene content that does not match any need. In order to illustrate this structure, Freud proposes a detailed analysis of smut:<span class="quote"><a id="108" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#108">中</a>We know what is meant by ‘smut’: the intentional bringing into prominence of sexual facts and relations by speech ... It is a further relevant fact that smut is directed to a particular person, by whom one is sexually excited and who, on hearing it, is expected to become aware of the speaker’s excitement and as a result to become sexually excited in turn. Instead of this excitement the other person maybe led to feel shame or embarrassment, which is only a reaction against the excitement and, in a roundabout way, is an admission of it. Smut is thus originally directed towards women and maybe equated with attempts at seduction. If a man in a company of men enjoys telling or listening to smut, the original situation, which owing to social inhibitions cannot be realised, is at the same time imagined. A person who laughs at smut that he hears is laughing as though he were the spectator of an act of sexual aggression.</span><a id="109" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#109">中</a>We can remark here that, once the signifier is envisaged as an apparatus of jouissance, language appears as an endless smut. Now Freud’s conclusion:<span class="quote"><a id="110" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#110">中</a>When the first person finds his libidinal impulse inhibited by the woman, he develops a hostile trend against that second person and calls on the originally interfering third person as his ally. Through the first person’s smutty speech the woman is exposed before the third, who, as listener, has now been bribed by the effortless satisfaction of his own libido.</span><a id="111" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#111">中</a>Smut lacks the formal conditions of a joke. While a joke would make a long detour in order to mask the sexual insinuation with a sophisticated metaphor, smut openly talks about sexuality, ‘the uttering of an undisguised nudity gives the first person enjoyment and makes the third person laugh’. Here Freud very quickly discovers that smut leads to the very core of social segregation. For Freud, who speaks here as a sincere bourgeois, the satisfaction through smut characterises the common man, while in the upper classes smut is tolerated only on the condition that it appear as a joke, with a complex codification of obscene content through condensation and displacement. In smut we encounter the zero level of metaphor and metonymy, while in refined social circles smut is transformed into an allusion. The common point between smut and joke nevertheless remains the satisfaction of the drive in face of an obstacle: ‘They circumvent this obstacle and in that way draw pleasure from a source which the obstacle had made inaccessible.’ The social context shows that the first case, the use of smut among the common men, only apparently differs from its sophistication in the upper classes. The inhibition of the drive is not weaker among the workers and the peasants. When Freud inclines to the conclusion that the common man is one step closer to the satisfaction and that he enjoys more than the upper classes, he repeats a typical bourgeois prejudice, yet he also shows that the inhibition is structural and that both smut and jokes are conditioned by the discrepancy between the need and the demand, pleasure and jouissance, usefulness and uselessness. If we imagine a situation in which the narrator is confronted with the object of smut, the conditions of the production of jouissance are abolished. What the narrator confronts in this case is castration. He can enjoy only through the third person, which introduces the dimension of the Other, where the linguistic equivocity produces the narrator’s own pleasure-gain in the listener. There is no difference between the upper and the lower classes, as far as their relation to jouissance is concerned. In both cases, sexuality and violence need to be masked in order to support the production of jouissance, even if this masquerade means that sexuality is masked into sexuality and violence into violence, as in the case of smut.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="112" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#112">中</a>Smut is in no respect more authentic from a sophisticated joke. It merely shows that the immediate addressing of sexuality, the obscenity of the smut, masks the impossibility of immediate satisfaction because sexuality does not correspond to any need. Lacan’s axiom ‘There is no sexual relation’ implies precisely that there is no sexual need. Sexuality is the field where the production of jouissance takes place. The procreative ‘use-value’ of sexuality is mere fiction. For this reason, the superego, too, does not prohibit enjoyment, it demands it, and when Lacan proposes his minimal prosopopoeia of the superego (Enjoy!) he actually spells out the echo of capitalist imperatives in the mental apparatus, the obscenity of the capitalist superego. The unsatisfiable demand for more, for the constant and uninterrupted production of surplus emerges from the gap in the Other, which points to the cut between use-value and exchange value that the commodity form imposes on every object in the capitalist universe. Or to formulate it with the main economic lesson of Freud’s analysis of humour, the pleasure in jokes does not mean that some lost jouissance is regained and the gap between the subject and the object is abolished but that jouissance is produced on the background of a structural impossibility of satisfaction.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="113" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#113">中</a>Freud’s crucial political insight was that every social order builds on libidinal economy. Consequently, an important part of efficiency of capitalism derives from the fact that it successfully mobilises the structural deadlocks of libidinal economy - the infamous ‘inexistence of sexual relation’ - and transforms them in the source of profit. Because its logic of production is coupled to the desire and the drive, it makes little sense, from the psychoanalytic point of view, to insist that capitalism represses sexuality, desire or drive. Quite the contrary, the capitalist mode of production seems to be the first social and economic system in history that created ideal conditions for their social realisation. No wonder, then, that Freud found in the relation between capital and labour the best illustration possible for the unconscious mode of production. Capitalism stretches its consequences in the unconscious, but this does not imply that capitalism is the unconscious.</p>
	<h2 id="part_4"><span style="font-size:1.4rem">R</span><span style="font-size:1.2rem">EPRESSION AND PRODUCTION</span></h2>
	<p class="text" style="text-indent: 0; text-align: justify;"><a id="114" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#114">中</a>The reason for the impossibility of immediate satisfaction of the drive lies in Verdrängung, repression, in which Freud detects another, probably the most unusual, type of unconscious labour:<span class="quote"><a id="115" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#115">中</a>The power which makes it difficult or impossible ... to enjoy undisguised obscenity is termed by us ‘repression’ ... It is our belief that culture and higher education have a large influence on the development of repression, and we suppose that, under such conditions, the psychical organisation undergoes an alteration . . as a result of which what was formerly felt as agreeable now seems unacceptable and is rejected with all possible psychical force. The repression labour [Verdrängungsarbeit] of civilisation brings it about that primary possibilities of enjoyment, which have now, however, been repudiated by the censorship in us, are lost to us. But to the human psyche all renunciation is exceedingly difficult, and so we find that tendentious jokes provide a means of undoing the renunciation and retrieving what was lost. When we laugh at a refined obscene joke, we are laughing at the same thing that makes a peasant laugh at a coarse piece of smut. In both cases the pleasure springs from the same source.</span><a id="116" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#116">中</a>Freud’s description immediately recalls the ‘repressive hypothesis’ that Foucault criticised in his work. On the one hand stands the labour of repression, which serves higher tendencies striving to preserve the cultural ideals and institutions, and, on the other, the originary yet excluded jouissance, the immediate possibilities of enjoyment, which had to be abandoned in favour of cultural progress. Cultural phenomena such as jokes create the impression of bypassing the prohibition and regaining a part of the lost and forbidden jouissance. Is this the ultimate point Freud’s theory of repression wants to make? The quoted passage certainly supports this, for Freud places the existence of the drive before culture, thereby formulating the hypothesis of a jouissance before jouissance, an originary jouissance, which was subsequently prohibited and mortified by the intervention of the law. Freud’s later theoretical endeavours tried to embody this hypothetic jouissance in the mythological figure of the primordial father, but his phylogenetic speculations are marked by a complex structure, which questions simplified critical readings. In Totem and Taboo, where Freud’s main topic of discussion is the birth of law from the originary patricide, the primal father is evidently a personification of originary jouissance, but he is equally an instance that imposes originary prohibition - the right to jouissance belongs to him only, not to his sons, the subjects of the obscene paternal violence, in which jouissance and law are indistinguishable. The primal father can stand for a jouissance before jouis-sance only insofar as he is also a law before the law. This fusion of jouissance with the law makes him an insatiable instance, demanding renunciation from all other members of the human horde.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="117" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#117">中</a>Freud’s descriptions of this prehistoric father-figure therefore show that his two main features merely exaggerate both tendencies that were discussed in relation to jokes, violence and obscenity: violence over his sons and obscene right over all women. The primal father is literally a joke -but a joke that Freud took seriously. Far from resolving the dilemmas that pushed Freud’s theories towards an epistemological deadlock, its speculative discussion merely condenses the paradoxes of the actually existing libidinal economy in one hypothetical character. Levi-Strauss and Lacan already recognised in the tale of originary patricide that Freud adopted from the ethnological and evolutionary context a scientific myth. But in Freud’s case, this myth becomes a curious structural equivalent of what Marx strived to address under primitive accumulation, a historical fiction, which strives to outline the genesis of modern antagonisms that determine both subjective and social reality.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="118" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#118">中</a>The repressive hypothesis, tempting as it may be, and the myth of the primordial father do not succeed in resolving all the immanent contradictions that Freud encounters in unconscious labour, namely that it produces pleasure-gain and creates long detours that apparently sabotage immediate satisfaction. The labour of repression is split between the achievements of condensation and displacement, on the one hand, and those of suppression and censorship, on the other. Unconscious production is conditioned by this discordance, showing that at least one segment of the repression questions its simplified understanding as a force that works from the higher mental or cultural instances (the ego and the superego) on the repressed desires and drives (the id). Being a productive unconscious labour, and even the most general description for the variety of its achievements, repression must be dissociated from the meaning attributed to it by the repressive hypothesis, namely that of suppression and oppression. The misunderstanding is surely encouraged by Freud’s initial explanations of repression, but it was strengthened through the translations of Verdrängung, in which notably the English and French translators heard oppression and suppression.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="119" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#119">中</a>One of the main achievements of Lacan’s return to Freud consisted in reaffirming the primacy of repression, in terms of productive labour, over the repressed, thereby providing the necessary ground for distinguishing repression from suppression or oppression. Repression may create the conditions for oppression, but it is not its synonym. Far from being instances and institutions of repression, family and society are its products, thereby assuming the same status as the repressed drives and desires. Once repression is distinguished from oppression, its productive character appears double. Freud’s book on jokes already showed that repression plays the crucial role in the production of jouissance, while the later metapsychological writings argued that it also constitutes the repressed. Like alienation, repression, as well, is immanently doubled on constitutive and constituted repression, whereby Freud addresses the constitutive repression in the notion of Urverdrängung, originary repression. The notion certainly accentuates the transcendental character of repression, which immediately recalls the structuralist transcendentalism of the symbolic. But originary repression goes a step further because it also exposes the inherently twofold structure of repression that, from the autonomy of symbolic structure, deduced two productive achievements.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="120" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#120">中</a>Before considering the significance of repression for the encounter of psychoanalysis with Marxism, it is necessary to recall the basic accounts of Freud’s theory of repression. Repression is revealed as a compromise procedure - Mittelding, intermediate thing-between escape and condemnation, which already deprives it of the exclusively negative connotation that later readings of Freud ended up privileging. It neither avoids the repressed tendency nor refuses its satisfaction. The central question is why the tendency is repressed in the first place, and the spontaneous answer would most likely be that its satisfaction would cause unpleasure. This is precisely not the case:<span class="quote"><a id="121" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#121">中</a>A necessary condition of its happening must clearly be that the drive’s attainment of its aim should produce unpleasure instead of pleasure. But we cannot well imagine such a contingency. There are no such drives: satisfaction of a drive is always pleasurable [lustvoll]. We should have to assume certain peculiar circumstances, some sort of process by which the pleasure of satisfaction is changed into unpleasure.</span><a id="122" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#122">中</a>Every satisfaction is lustvoll, full of pleasure; there is no satisfaction without the production of pleasure. In order to respond to this dilemma, the notions of the drive and of pleasure need to be questioned thoroughly.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="123" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#123">中</a>The Freudian concept of the drive remains controversial even today. The term is adopted from the physiological and biological context, and even from mechanics, just as labour-power, but it describes a phenomenon that, even if traversing the biological body, reaches beyond its limits. In the naturalistic context, the drive stands for a bodily need, which can be traced back to physiological mechanisms. Freud, accordingly, distinguishes between drives that point to a quasi-natural need (e. g hunger and thirst)this was probably the reason why Trieb was initially translated as ‘instinct’-where repression is out of the question, and drives that deviate from this apparently natural satisfaction and are subjected to repression (in this category, Freud situated sexuality):<span class="quote"><a id="124" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#124">中</a>Let us take the case in which a drive stimulus such as hunger remains unsatisfied. It then becomes imperative and can be allayed by nothing but the action that satisfies it; it keeps up a constant tension of need. Nothing in the nature of a repression seems in this case to come remotely into question.</span><a id="125" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#125">中</a>In this physiological sense, hence in relation to the preservation of organism, the drive is entirely reducible to need and cannot become the target of repression. It can be satisfied only by a corresponding action (eating, drinking and so on). The drive that demands the labour of repression is too symbolic to be biological or physiological. This, and nothing else, is the meaning of Freud’s claim that the drive ‘appears to us as a concept on the frontier between the mental and the somatic’ or as ‘the psychical representative of the stimuli originating from within the organism and reaching the mind’. This careful placement of the driven either physiological nor psychological - sufficiently indicates that Freud aims beyond the classical mind-body dualism, without therefore slipping into a vitalist monism. The drive is the border that from within traverses and splits the body on the physiological and the libidinal, so that we are dealing with some sort of conflictual monism including negativity, precisely the negativity of representation, which brings the materiality of the signifier and the causality that depends on its autonomy into the picture. As an internal border, which makes the biological equivocal with the linguistic, the drive remains a bodily phenomenon and even appears indistinguishable from the need it translates or represents. Fusing a physiological stimulus with its representation, the drive becomes a material echo of linguistic autonomy, but it is also what the intervention of the signifier isolates in the tendencies of the organism towards self-preservation. Freud’s inquiries circulate around this epistemological deadlock: because the echo is too material, it cannot be declared an idealist entity or a scientific fiction, but because its satisfaction seems to cause unpleasure, which is not the case with physiological needs, something violates the mechanisms of satisfaction. This scandal in the end exposes the minimal gap between the drive and organic needs: the drive is the symbolic isolation of their demand, the imperative for satisfaction that they contain. Detached from its repetitive organic context, the demand for satisfaction assumes a life of its own, and this is where the unpleasurable aspect of satisfaction enters the picture.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="126" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#126">中</a>Freud was most certainly hesitant regarding the ontological status of the drive. In his New Introductory Lectures, he famously wrote that the drive is comparable to a mythological being, and his drive-theory to ancient mythology. Certainly the drive is a hypothesis, which strives to account for the fact that the apparatus of the signifier, which conditions the split between consciousness and the unconscious, does not follow useful goals, the satisfaction of needs, but tends towards immediate pleasure-gain. The drive names the tendency that accounts for a series of material consequences of the signifier, without therefore appearing before the analyst’s eyes as a positive substance: ‘In our work we cannot for a moment disregard them, yet we are never sure that we are seeing them clearly.’ The drive assumes the same ontological and epistemological status as the energy does in physics. Its hypostasis is indispensible, but one can never confront it directly, only observe its consequences, first and foremost the production of pleasure-gain and the conversion of pleasure into unpleasure. The visibility of the drive’s satisfaction is comparable to the visibility of entropy, which can be observed only after science has placed the formal language of mathematics over the physical world. The manifestation of physiological needs additionally blurs the visibility of the drive, or better put, because all the bodily needs are channelled through the drive as their privileged representation, they no longer remain unproblematic. The drive is the paradigmatic case of the pun traduttore-traditore. It represents (translates) the apparently natural need in an unfaithfully productive way, thereby betraying its satisfaction.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="127" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#127">中</a>The translation first and foremost produces a change in the status of pleasure. There is no drive the satisfaction of which would not cause pleasure, although this pleasure is no longer an affect that accompanies the decrease of tension. We can return to Marx’s example of the two hungers from the Grundrisse. The pleasure that can be associated with the satisfaction of hunger is different from the pleasure that clings to the act of eating. The intertwining of the two imperatives, the need and the demand, in the satisfaction of a physiological need conceals the fact that the demand of the drive is constant, that it repeats the imperative of satisfaction beyond the need. It would be too simple to see in an insatiable hunger that swallows raw food a pre-symbolic natural instinct, which stands opposite to the cultural consumption of food. Bare instinctual life is an imaginary presentation of what takes place behind the apparent satisfaction of physiological needs, the persistence of the imperative beyond every attempt of satisfaction. This feature of the drive did not go unnoticed in Freud: ‘A drive ... never operates as a force giving a momentary impact but always as a constant one.’ The detachment of the imperative from a concrete reference, and consequently the autonomy of the demand, which depends on the autonomy of the signifier, places the drive in discrepancy with every supposedly natural or instinctual need. The demand of the oral drive, isolated in the need for nourishment, persists behind different and apparently unrelated activities such as eating, smoking, speaking, sucking and so on. Due to this persistence, the drives constant force can only be experienced as unpleasure, more precisely, as Lust, die nicht als solche empfunden werden kann, pleasure that cannot be felt as such. Pleasure that can only be experienced as unpleasure - with this formulation, Freud provides the best definition of what Lacan envisages with his notion of jouissance. In the need, displeasure precedes its satisfaction; in the drive, displeasure accompanies satisfaction and is the privileged form of pleasure. Satisfaction now takes place in the increase of tension, and this tension is due to the insatiable Drang, pressure, which is ‘common to all drives; it is in fact their very essence’. The drive as representation of physiological needs comes down to the imperative signifier, S1, the repressed signifier of jouissance.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="128" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#128">中</a>Here the second essential feature of the drive enters the picture, which clarifies that Marx’s opposition between bare hunger and cultivated hunger indeed highlights two immanent aspects of the drive and not the opposition between nature and culture. Under constant pressure, Freud understands the ‘amount of force or the measure of the demand for labour [Arbeitsanforderung] that it represents’. At the very core of the drive stands a permanent demand for labour, representation of labour-power, hence the Freudian attempt to elaborate an energetics of the drive. This demand for labour explains the simultaneous sameness and difference between pleasure and unpleasure in unconscious satisfaction. At this point, Freud’s early analogy with capitalism finds another repetition. Because the unconscious is split between the capitalist and the labourer, the process of satisfaction is necessarily experienced on both ends, pleasure and unpleasure. Yet the one enjoying is not the subject, for as Freud’s analyses demonstrate again and again, there is no subject of jouissance. There is only the subject of labour, the addressee of the demand for labour. There is no imperative of jouissance without the imperative of labour. Consequently, Labour! is true meaning of the superego’s injunction Enjoy! The critical kernel of Freud’s labour theory of the unconscious again becomes strilking, since Marx’s reformulation of the political-economic labour theory of value into a materialist theory of the subject was the first one to establish this interdependency of the two demands that can be associated with capital: the constant demand for surplus-value and the constant demand for labour.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="129" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#129">中</a>The difference between need and demand is finally reflected at the level of the object. Unlike need, the drive appears to be without an object:<span class="quote"><a id="130" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#130">中</a>The object of a drive is the thing in regard to which or through which the drive is able to achieve its aim. It is what is most variable about a drive and is not originally connected with it, but becomes assigned to it only in consequence of being peculiarly fitted to make satisfaction possible.</span><a id="131" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#131">中</a>Lacan later draws attention to this passage in order to explain how the object a relates to the montage of the drive. However, we cannot overlook the fact that Freud -prior to Lacan’s developments -again hints at the difference between the content and the form, which already backed the mechanism of desire. The drive reaches its satisfaction in the object-form, which corresponds to the autonomy of differences, and based on this displacement the demand for satisfaction can become imperative. The drive becomes a symbolic machine without end, consuming objects for the sake of consumption(i. e. , extraction of surplus), and designating the permanent Entstellung, deformation and displacement of the need.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="132" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#132">中</a>Let us now turn to the paradoxes of repression. Freud writes that repression is not an originary defence mechanism but can only become operative once ‘a sharp cleavage has occurred between conscious and unconscious mental activity’. Repression already presupposes the unconscious, and its function does not consist so much in supressing, inhibiting or hindering satisfaction but in keeping the drive away from consciousness. The paradox of repression lies in the fact that repression is secondary, despite being constitutive of the repressed. It can only emerge after the scission of the mental apparatus between consciousness and the unconscious has been established, but it is also the necessary condition for this cleavage. The hypothesis of an originary repression is supposed to solve the paradox in the relation between the repression and the repressed:<span class="quote"><a id="133" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#133">中</a>We have reason to assume that there is an originary repression, a first phase of repression, which consists in the psychical (ideational) representative of the drive being denied entrance into the conscious. With this fixation is established; the representative in question persists unaltered from then onwards and the drive remains attached to it.</span><a id="134" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#134">中</a>What is repressed is not some originary instinctual substance that the intervention of language would suppress but the signifier of the drive, a signifier that aims at jouissance and on which the translation of the supposedly physiological need into the symbolic demand depends. Freud again recurs to the more accessible language of the repressive hypothesis but in fact targets the autonomy of the signifier. The actual achievement of originary repression is the production of the master-signifier, which is synonymous to the autonomy of the system of differences, a signifier of the demand and jouissance. The originary repression thus confronts an impossible task to examine the repressed in statu nascendi, the genesis of the repressed, which is, in the last instance, the same as the genesis of language. The description of the structure of repression continues in the following way:<span class="quote"><a id="135" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#135">中</a>The second stage of repression, repression proper, affects mental derivatives of the repressed representative, or such trains of thought as, originating elsewhere, have come into associative connection with it. On account of this association, these ideas experience the same fate as what was originally repressed. Repression proper, therefore, is actually an after-pressure [Nachdrängen]. Moreover, it is a mistake to emphasise only the repulsion, which operates from the direction of the conscious upon what is to be repressed; quite as important is the attraction exercised by what was originally repressed upon everything with which it can establish a connection. Probably the trend towards repression would fail in its purpose if these two forces did not co-operate, if there were not something previously repressed ready to receive what is repelled by the conscious.</span><a id="136" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#136">中</a>Constituted repression, the second stage of repression, is productive unconscious labour. All other forms of unconscious labour can be reduced to repression, which now appears as the satisfaction of the drive rather than its suppression or obstruction. Here another complication emerges. We are not simply dealing with two different repressions, of which one would be in the past and the other in the present. The historical reading overlooks the topological aspect of repression that is linked to its inherent doubling: in order to have repression, there have to be at least two. A singular repression could not constitute the relation that Freud very precisely describes in reference to attraction and repulsion. The inner moments of every concrete act of repression are originary repression(the constitution of the repressed)and the labour of repression (the satisfaction of the repressed tendency). This double structure can be compared with the chain of signifiers. The cut that produces the split between consciousness and the unconscious is redoubled, as the signifier of the repressed demand for surplus-jouissance (S1 - a) and as a difference that relates to another signifier (S1 - S2), initiating unconscious production and representing the ‘amount of demand for labour’, labour-power. Repression activity contains both axes of the signifier, representation and production. This internal doubling unveils the parallax that Freud explicitly underlines in the reminder that besides the repulsion from consciousness one should equally acknowledge the attraction that derives from the point of the originary repression, the master-signifier. From the point of view of consciousness, repression appears as a defence mechanism that represses in the sense of oppression. The repressive hypothesis absolutises this perspective, and we can find its most contemporary political exemplification in neoliberalism. Did the neoliberal ideology not turn around the idea that the market contains ‘creative potentials’, which need to be liberated through deregulation? The concept of the free market mobilises the repressive hypothesis, through which capitalism perverts and neutralises the political radicality of modern liberation movements. Only from the position of the subject, which is the position of Freud’s labour theory of the unconscious and Marx’s critique of fetishism, can repression appear as an operation that conditions the satisfaction of the drive through the double production of the surplus-object and of the alienated subject in a concrete form. The drive now no longer appears deprived of its immediate satisfaction, repulsion (rejection) turns into attraction(satisfaction), and unpleasure turns into a specific form of pleasure.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="137" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#137">中</a>This problematic is not unrelated to Marx, for in the double structure of repression, Freud encounters the same problem that concerns the accumulation of capital. When Marx turns towards the historical conditions of capitalism, he reformulates the question of primitive accumulation, which served classical political economy in its apology for capitalism. Marx unveils its fictional character but then also provides its rational reinterpretation in the context of the historical genesis of the capitalist logic, the transformation of the old spirit of the miser into the modern spirit of capitalism, which deepened the social relations of domination by rooting them in the very relations between things. The modern reification of the master, i. e. , its detachment from the old figure of divine sovereign, inevitably brought about the reification of the subject.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="138" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#138">中</a>The psychoanalytic value of Marx’s speculation on the origins of capitalism consists in him exposing the link between jouissance and ideology, and more concretely, the rootedness of economic liberalism in the fiction of the subject of enjoyment - a fiction, which remains entirely intact in today’s neoliberal condition. Of course, the significance of primitive accumulation is commonly known and has been discussed by several authors. Marx starts from the structural paradox in the relation between accumulation and production. Just as in the case of repression and the repressed, where repression constitutes the repressed that it simultaneously presupposes, the analysis of accumulation contains a vicious circle, in which production and accumulation support each other: there is no accumulation of capital without a preceding production of surplus, but there is no production of surplus without the preceding accumulation of capital either.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="139" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#139">中</a>Marx first draws attention to the fact that primitive accumulation, as used in political economy, contains a moral lesson, thereby assuming the role of original sin in theology. It thereby also assumes the function of myth, since it strives to address the unattainable historical origin of accumulation of capital - a point that can be grasped only by means of fictitious constructions and fantasies. The tale is grounded on the presupposition of jouissance on the side of the proto-proletarian and the equally presupposed renunciation on the side of the proto-capitalist:<span class="quote"><a id="140" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#140">中</a>Long ago there were two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent and above all frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals [Lumpen], spending their substance, and more, in riotous living. . . Thus it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort finally had nothing to sell except their own skins. And from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority who, despite all their labour, have up to now nothing to sell but themselves, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly, although they have long ceased to work.</span><a id="141" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#141">中</a>At the beginning there were the ascetic and the consumer: the subject of renunciation and the subject of enjoyment. The political-economic myth thus tries to explain the genesis of positive and negative surplus: surplus-value, originating from abstinence and embodied in the first accumulated wealth, and labour-power, originating from excess, for which the myth claims that it inevitably generates debt. Abstinence helps accumulating the surplus that will finally enable the minority to appropriate the means of production, while jouissance creates a negative that will eventually force the majority to sell their own bodies. For political economy this scenario sounds entirely rational: the capitalist forefathers accumulated the minimal wealth through personal sacrifice, so it seems just that their contemporary offspring continue to profit from it without restriction. At the same time, the proletarians are responsible for their own misery because their predecessors wasted more than they possessed, ihr alles und mehr. This apparently insignificant formulation is crucial because it envisages the interdependency of jouissance and debt, seemingly adopted from religion, hence Marx’s comparison of primitive accumulation with the fable of original sin.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="142" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#142">中</a>The political-economic myth significantly marked recent attempts to legitimise austerity measures, as others have already noticed. The global South was presented as the space of enjoying subjects that the absurd national debts meanwhile turned into an oasis of surplus population; while its counterpart, the global North, and notably Germany, appeared as the land of saving, a success story possible only under the condition that the economic growth is anchored in the constant renunciation of jouissance. Of course, everyone could witness that the actual situation was quite the opposite: imposed saving initiates a negative spiral that produces more debt than is possible to repay. This debt is not a moral obligation calling for repayment but actually has a productive function: the austerity measures are supposed to create economic devastation that will strengthen the link between citizens and the structural function of indebted subject. This recent development once again confirms the thesis that the primitive accumulation is not a process in the past but an inner moment of the present that reproduces the conditions of possibility for capitalist accumulation and expropriation. It designates the root of the discursive process that constitutes the individual as a subject of value, just as originary repression addresses the root of the autonomy of the signifier, through which the double production of the subject of the unconscious and of surplus-jouissance can be initiated. The scission between consciousness and the unconscious is the Freudian way of addressing this autonomy.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="143" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#143">中</a>According to the implicit prejudice of the political-economic tale, the labourer continues to enjoy(to laze around and become even more indebted), while the capitalist continues to save(to increase his wealth). Marx introduces a minimal correction to this scenario. The capitalist subject most certainly is in the first instance a subject of debt but never enjoyed as a subject. In other words, the capitalist figure of subjectivity did not emerge from the transformation of some hypothetical subject of jouissance into labour-power, as political economists suggest, but from a specific transformation of jouissance itself. The abstinence theory of the capitalist highlights this development:<span class="quote"><a id="144" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#144">中</a>Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! ‘Industry furnishes the material which saving accumulates’. Therefore save, save, i.e., reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value or surplus product into capital!Accumulation for the sake of accumulation, production for the sake of production: this was the formula in which classical economics expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie in the period of its domination ... If, in the eyes of classical economics, the proletarian is merely a machine for the production of surplus-value, the capitalist too is merely a machine for the transformation of this surplus-value into surplus capital.</span><a id="145" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#145">中</a>Marx’s correction concerns the externalisation of the link between accumulation and saving that already existed in the premodern spirit of the miser. In the foundation of the system lies the imperative of abstinence, which is directly translatable in the imperative of indebting: the subject’s duty is to assume and to interiorise the debt created by the jouissance of the system - and precisely for this reason Marx remarks that the national debt is the only wealth that enters into possession of all modern nations, i.e., something that belongs to everyone and from which no one has the right to exempt him or herself. While merely a minority personifies systemic jouissance, labour-power becomes the sole universal subjective position in the capitalist universe. The political-economic tale of primitive accumulation contains a grain of distorted truth, showing that no jouissance precedes renunciation but that there is a strong correlation between the renunciation and the production of jouissance, both through generalised indebting.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="146" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#146">中</a>After criticising the political-economic myth of origin, Marx suggests his own rationalised variant of primitive accumulation. In the reconstruction, which assumes no less than the status of a historiographical fiction, the separation of producers from the means of production is accomplished through blood and fire, the constitutive violence that progressively transforms the feudal relations of domination and subjection into the capitalist ones. I am not going to go deeper into Marx’s reconstruction of the genesis of capitalism, the accuracy and the general validity of which remains a topic of discussion. What is more important is the logical background of Marx’s outline of the historical genesis of capitalism, which in many respects anticipates Freud’s topological account of repression. In Marx’s reading, the crucial part in the genesis is attributed to the invention of national debt. He places the emphasis on the transformation of premodern religious debt, still embedded in its mystifying metaphysical meaning, into modern debt, founded on public credit and turned into a quantified and meaningless abstraction. This shift is accomplished through the transformation of the logic that grounded the feudal social link, what Lacan called the master’s discourse:<span class="quote"><a id="147" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#147">中</a>The starting-point of the development that gave rise both to the wage-labourer and to the capitalist was the enslavement of the worker. The advance made consisted in a change in the form of this servitude, in the transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation.</span><a id="148" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#148">中</a>The formal change invents a new form of indebtedness that no longer has economic-metaphysical roots in submission to the feudal lord, the monarch or any other representative of divine power on earth, but instead in the economic inequality that is codified in the apparently unproblematic and concrete act of exchange. The truth of the capitalist worldview is universal indebtedness produced by emptied political categories such as freedom and equality. The invention and social implementation of national debt and public credit amounted to a new discursive production without abolishing the old structure of domination and inequality. It merely transformed the premodern serf into abstract labour-power, a machine to produce surplus-value, and in the same move introduced a new figure of the master, the capitalist, who personifies the machine to transform the surplus-product into capital. This transformation integrates the surplus-product into the social link, introducing a new form fetishisation of social relations, through the fetishisation of objects. In the same move, the feudal master is stripped of his fetish quality, which also means that the new capitalist master no longer depends on concrete personifications. Mastery becomes an abstraction embodied and operative in every object that enters the economic sphere: commodity, money and financial abstractions. If the king had two bodies, the mortal and the sublime, the capitalist has merely one but is therefore endowed, as Marx claims, with the soul of capital.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="149" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#149">中</a>In capitalism, the subject is indebted to neither the secular nor the divine master, but to the economic system itself. Consequently, capitalism is no realisation of the spirit of Protestantism, as Max Weber argued, but a cult of indebting, as Walter Benjamin specified in his famous critical note. If we want to maintain the link between capitalism and religious logic - this still makes sense because of the structural function of debt, which in both cases builds on the equivocity of morality and economy - we nevertheless have to take into account a certain regression in religion: from institutionalised religion of revelation to the no less institutionalised (through central banks, corporations, multinationals, political Troikas and so on) cult. Marx aims at this regression when he reduces the capitalist social link to commodity fetishism: from religion that understands itself as a religion of truth and that essentially is a ‘true religion’ (Lacan) into ‘neo-paganism’, an irrational secularised belief in the self-valorising power of capital.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="150" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#150">中</a>With the transformation of the master into an abstraction, the abstract debt no longer grounds the social link between the master and the serf but instead supports that between the citizen and the state:<span class="quote"><a id="151" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#151">中</a>The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, the origins of which are to be found in Genoa and Venice as early as the middle ages, took possession of Europe as a whole ... The national debt, i.e., the externalisation [Veräusserung] of the state - whether that state is despotic, constitutional or republican - marked the capitalistic era with its stamp. The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collective possession of a modern people is the national debt. Hence, as a necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in debt. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. And with the rise of national debt-macing, lack of faith in the national debt takes the place of the sin against the Holy Ghost, for which there is no forgiveness.</span><a id="152" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#152">中</a>With the genesis of the national debt, Marx’s analysis of primitive accumulation most definitely changes its character. While the description of the constitutive violence over the English rural population remained in imaginary historical coordinates and in the horizon of repressive hypothesis, just as Freud’s early accounts of repression, the focus on national debt turns towards the logical displacement in the social mode of production, which inevitably comprises the production of labour-power as a specifically capitalist form of subjectivity: the sole subject that corresponds to the regime of abstract debt and to the modern credit system.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="153" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#153">中</a>The invention of national debt and the corresponding production of subjectivity expose the kernel of the capitalist form of alienation that Marx indicates in the term ‘externalisation of the state’. The capitalist state simply is an institutionalised form of a more underlying, constitutive alienation, which determines the logical relation between economic ‘abstractions’, capital and labour-power. The externalisation of the state in the national debt is accompanied by its internalisation, in the sense that it shapes the nature of modern subjectivity. Being essentially grounded on indebting and standing for national debt as such, the modern state places every citizen in the position of the debtor, while the position of the creditor is assumed by the social institutions of capital: the central banks. At this point it becomes most evident that the emergence of the modern state is inevitably accompanied by the genesis of an extra-state power, which pertains to financial institutions and which is essentially authoritarian.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="154" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#154">中</a>The equivalent of the placement of the citizen in the position of the debtor is the transformation of the subject into a quantifiable and exploitable subjectivity, which is indebted in advance and is also produced as such. In this way Marx rejects the fantasmatic projection of some hypothetical subject of jouissance before the subject of abstract debt. His rationalisation of the political-economic myth shows that the capitalist demystification and quantification of the premodern religious debt creates a more efficient abstract universality -national debt -which leaves no subject outside its reach, thereby introducing a new Holy Spirit, that is, a social link grounded on the negative spiral of productive indebting, out of which rises the spectrality and apparent autonomy of capital.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="155" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#155">中</a>To repeat, what is at stake in Marx’s rationalised variant of primitive accumulation is the problem of constitutive alienation, on the level of which the production of capitalist subjectivity can be observed. Abstract debt and abstract labour thereby become two inseparable aspects of the subject. And because the structure of the capitalist mode of production is internally doubled, the critical appropriation and rationalisation of the notion of primitive accumulation indeed shows features that are strictly homologous to the Freudian notion of originary repression, where the production of constitutively alienated subjectivity is no less central. Even if Marx and Freud might have taken the notion of origin literally, they still drew attention to a structural and temporal paradox, which undermines the linear representation of history thanks to the notion of retroactive causality. Consequently, the prehistorical origin in question turns out to be more a prehistory within the present, retroactively projected onto the past and operating within the present condition as a constant refoundation of the capitalist relations of production. Behind the apparent quest for historical origin, Marx and Freud raise the logical and materialist question of the cause, which brought the indebted subject and the subject of the unconscious into being.</p>
	<p class="text"><a id="156" class="annotation" href="chapter_2.xhtml#156">中</a>The paradoxical relation between accumulation and production, which supports the structure and the efficiency of capitalism, might indeed make this mode of production a vicious circle, from which no escape seems to be possible. At the same time this paradox is also the reason of its structural disclosure and permanent instability, which announce the opposite appearance, the imminent breakdown of the system. The conceptual couple of the fetish and the symptom, shared by critique of political economy and psychoanalysis, addresses precisely these two opposite appearances of capitalism.</p>
</body>
</html>