<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>注释</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<div style="z-index:1;position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="note_75.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_77.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<dl class="back_note">
		<dt>[<a href="chapter_1.xhtml#back_note_76">←76</a>]</dt>
		<dd class="footnote">我们可以再次回想起《研讨班17》上的这个谜题。这一点可以与马克思对商品拜物主义的批判有关，在后者中，其逻辑机制的重建不只是废除了资本主义抽象物的拜物教，而且表明商品拜物教的有效性建立在思想与行动间的差异之上。马克思会说：“他们并不知道，尽管如此，他们还是这么做了。”阿尔弗雷德·索恩-雷塞尔通过这句话引入了实在抽象的概念，因此人们可以立即注意到它相当接近拉康的话语概念。见阿尔弗雷德·索恩-雷塞尔《商品形式与思维形式》，1978年,103-33.关于他的作品的精神分析背景,请参见斯拉沃热·齐泽克,《意识形态的崇高客体》,伦敦: Verso,1989,16-21.</dd>
		<dd class="footnote">We can again recall the riddle from <span class="term">Seminar XVII</span>. The point can be related to Marx's critique of commodity fetishism, in which the reconstruction of its logical mechanisms does not simply abolish the fetishisation of capitalist abstractions but rather shows that the efficiency of commodity fetishism is grounded on a discrepancy between thinking and action. Marx will say: ‘They do not know it, nevertheless they do it’. Alfred Sohn-Rethel used this statement in order to introduce the notion of real abstraction, for which one can immediately notice that it comes rather close to Lacan's notion of discourse. See A. Sohn-Rethel, <span class="term">Warenform und Denkform</span>, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1978, 103-33. For the psychoanalytic contextualisation of his work, see S. Zitek, The Sublime Object of Ideology, London: Verso, 1989, 16-21.</dd>
	</dl>
</body>
</html>
