<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>注释</title>
</head>

<body class="calibre">
	<div style="position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="note_127.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_129.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<dl class="back_note">
		<dt>[<a href="chapter_1.xhtml#back_note_128">←128</a>]</dt>
		<dd class="footnote">马克思在《资本论》的另一个关键摘录中提到了这种实质性的丧失：“如果我们无视商品的使用价值，就只剩下一种属性，那就是作为劳动产物的存在。”但即使是劳动产物也已经在我们手中转变了。如果我们从它的使用价值中进行抽象，我们就同时抽象化了使它成为使用价值的物质成分和形式……伴随着劳动产物的有用特性的消失的，是体现于其中的劳动种类的有用特性的一并消失；这随之导致了不同具体劳动形式的消失。它们不能再被区分了，而是全被简化为同一种劳动，即抽象的人类劳动”（马克思，《资本论》，第1卷，第128页）。</dd>
		<dd class="footnote">Marx thematises this material reduction in another crucial excerpt of <span class="term">Capital</span>: ‘If then we disregard the use-value of commodities, only one property remains, that of being products of labour. But even the product of labour has already been transformed in our hands. If we make abstraction from its use-value, we abstract also from the material constituents and forms which make it a use-value. . . With the disappearance of the useful character of the products of labour, the useful character of the kinds of labour embodied in them also disappears; this in turn entails the disappearance of the different concrete forms of labour. They can no longer be distinguished, but are all together reduced to the same kind of labour, human labour in the abstract’ (Marx, <span class="term">Capital</span>, Vol. 1, 128).</dd>
	</dl>
</body>
</html>

