<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>注释</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<div style="z-index:1;position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="note_144.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_146.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<dl class="back_note">
		<dt>[<a href="chapter_2.xhtml#back_note_145">←145</a>]</dt>
		<dd class="footnote">让我们回忆一下拉康在巴黎弗洛伊德学派解散是的著名调解：“大他者消失了。我也觉得这很滑稽。不过我能接受这个打击，尽管这让你们觉得刺激，但是我这么做并不是为了这个”（拉康，《电视》，134)。大他者不存在既是学派的条件（因为只有大他者不存在才能让学派或政党免于成为教会）也是首要的风险（因为大他者的不存总是伴随着一种阻抗，它推动学派或政党的成员回到机构化的转变上，即成为教会）。在组织的平面之上，核心的斗争发生于机构化转变（将组织重新和虚拟的大他者相关联）和主体的政治动员性（由于大他者消失了，动员性才成为可能）之间。</dd>
		<dd class="footnote">Let us recall Lacan’s famous intervention during the dissolution of the Ecole freudienne de Paris: ‘The Other is missing. It seems funny to me too. I can take the blow though, which gives you a thrill of sorts, but I’m not doing it for that’ (Lacan,<span class="term">Television</span>, 134). The inexistence of the Other is both the condition and the ultimate risk of the School - the condition because only the inexistence of the Other can prevent the School or the Party from turning into a Church; the risk because this inexistence is always accompanied by the resistance that pushes the members of the School or of the Party back into the institutional transference, hence into the Church. On the terrain of organisation, the central struggle takes place between the institutional transference that links the organisation back to the hypothesis of the Other, and the political mobilisation of the subject, which is possible precisely because the Other is missing.</dd>
	</dl>
</body>
</html>
