<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>注释</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<div style="z-index:1;position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="note_167.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_169.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<dl class="back_note">
		<dt>[<a href="chapter_2.xhtml#back_note_168">←168</a>]</dt>
		<dd class="footnote">因为资本主义话语的效率是基于这种特定的转换的：从封建主义奴隶主到资本主义，从奴隶到无产阶级，拉康后来声称，资本主义逐步揭示了奴隶主的本质，即他不知道他想要什么。在资本家的形象中，主人被简化为需要生产性劳动的基本命令：“例如，在主人的话语中，实际上不可能有一个主人让整个世界发挥作用。如果真的要去做的话，让人们去工作比自己工作更累。主人从不这样做。他给了一个手势，主人能指，每个人都跳了起来。这就是你必须开始的地方，这实际上是完全不可能的。它每天都是有形的”（拉康，《精神分析的另一面》，174页）。</dd>
		<dd class="footnote">Because the efficiency of the capitalist discourse is based on this specific transformation of the feudal master into the capitalist and the serf into the proletarian, Lacan will later claim that capitalism progressively reveals the very essence of the master, namely that he does not know what he wants. In the figure of the capitalist, the master is reduced to the bare imperative that requires productive labour: ‘In the master’s discourse, for instance, it is effectively impossible that there be a master who makes the entire world function. Getting people to work is even more tiring, if one really has to do it, than working oneself. The master never does it. He gives a sign, the master signifier, and everybody jumps. That’s where you have to start, which is, in effect, completely impossible. It’s tangible every day’ (Lacan, <span class="term">The Other Side of Psychoanalysis</span>, 174).</dd>
	</dl>
</body>
</html>
