<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/content.css"/>
	<title>注释</title>
</head>

<body class="main">
	<div style="z-index:1;position:fixed;right:0.5rem;top:0.5rem;width:10rem;height:2.5rem"><a href="note_203.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">←</button></a><a href="note_205.xhtml"><button style="width:5rem;height:2.5rem">→</button></a></div>
	<dl class="back_note">
		<dt>[<a href="chapter_2.xhtml#back_note_204">←204</a>]</dt>
		<dd class="footnote"></dd>
		<dd class="footnote">The talk about ‘instincts is not without risks, since the very idea of an instinct is built on shaky ground. Lacan briefly addresses this issue in Television when he talks of the instinct as a potentially inadequate concept: "There is no unconscious except for the speaking being. The others, who possess being only through being named -even though they impose themselves from within the real -have instinct, namely the knowledge needed for their survival. Yet this is so only for our thought, which might be inadequate here’(Lacan, Television, 5). Animals do not have drives; they only have instincts, which could be considered a knowledge in the real, the function of which is to guarantee animals their survival. Lacan’s reservation towards this hypothesis is justified: knowledge in the real is, in the end, an ungrounded and unscientific hypothesis. But this does not annul the initial claim: because the drive is conditioned by the autonomy of the signifier, it can be attributed to humans but not to animals. Animals have a language of signs but one cannot claim(yet)that they have the signifier, the autonomy of which, to repeat again, consists in the fact that it relates to another signifier. The conclusion is thus that one does not need to refer to the instinct in order to theorise the drive, and Freuds Trieblehre did precisely this: it detached the drive from its biological and physiological context.</dd>
	</dl>
</body>
</html>
